FEDERAL negai GAZETTE OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA BE Content Regulation not Investment Regulation i . regulation 200. COUNCIL OF MINISTERS INVESTMENT REGULATION This Regulation is issued by the Council of Ministers of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia pursuant to Article 55 of the Investment Proclamation not PART ONE . GENERAL 8. 1. Short Title 3 This Regulation may be cited as the Investment Regulation not . 5 re EE Unit rice 35.95 zoo negai go 80001 ate 2582 8 enter . 12762 Federal negan gazette No 78. september 270 the ping . El . 2. Definitions In this regulations unless the context otherwise requires proclamation means the Investment Proclamation not Other words and phrases in this Regulation shall have the definition assigned 16 them in the Proclamation PART TWO INVESTMENT AREAS 3. Investment Areas Reserved for Joint Investment with the Government Any investor may invest in the following investment areas only jointly with the government Manufacturing 61 weapons ammunition and explosives used as weapons or to make weapons 2 Import and export ol electrical energy 3 International air transport services 4 Bus rapid transit and Postal services excluding courier services 5 12763 EX . boyfriend eric . Federal negai Gazette not september 27 2020 page 8. A 4. Investment Areas Reserved for Domestic Investors CE xu if AT aft following investment areas are exclusively reserved for domestic investors Subject to applicable law banking insurance and businesses excluding capital goods finance business Transmission and distribution of electrical energy through integrated national grid system Primary and middle level health services Wholesale trade petroleum petroleum products wholesale of own products produced in ethiopian excluding wholesale of electronic commerce Retail trade excluding retail of and electronic commerce as provided under appropriate law of own products produced in ethiopian Import trade excluding liquefied petroleum gas and bitumen Export trade of raw coffee khat oil seeds pulses minerals hides and skins products of natural forest chicken and livestock including pack animals bought on the market Construction and drilling services below Grade i hotel lodge resort motel guesthouse and pension services excluding those that are restaurant tearoom coffee shops bars nightclubs and catering services excluding national cuisine restaurant service GE 8 . 12764 Federal gazette not september 2020 page tal ten 1 TE TA Travel agency travel ticket sales and trade auxiliary services Tour operation Operating lease of equipments machinery s and vehicles excluding heavy equipments machinery s and specialized vehicles Transport services excluding the following areas a Railway transport be transport transport do Freight transport having a capacity of more than 25 tones and Transport services reserved for joint investment with the Government or domestic investors Making indigenous traditional medicines Producing bakery products and pastries for domestic market Grinding Barbershop and beauty salon services smithers and tailoring except by garment factories Maintenance and repair services including ai redraft maintenance repair and overhaul but excluding repair and maintenance of heavy industry machinery s and medical equipment Aircraft ground handling and other related services else . 12765 Federal negai Gazette september 2020 page RE 5 RE RE if face . Saw milling timber manufacturing and assembling of wood products Media services clearance service Brick and block manufacturing quarrying Lottery and sports betting Laundry services excluding those provided on industrial scale Translation and secretarial services Security services Brokerage services Attorney and legal consultancy services and Private employment agency services excluding such services for the employment of seafarers and other similar professionals that require high expertise and international experience and network 5. Investment Areas Reserved for Joint Investment with Domestic and Foreign Investors Any foreign investor may invest in the following investment areas only jointly with a domestic investors a Freight forwarding and shipping agency services be Domestic air transport service public transport service using buses with a seating capacity of more than 45 passengers 4 ve worn Tees la AER girlfriend 5 . Federal not 78. September 3020 . page 8. 8 5. per do Urban mass transport service with large carrying capacity Advertisement and promotion services fu Audiovisual services motion picture and video recording production and distribution and Accounting and Auditing services A foreign investor jointly investing with a domestic investor in areas listed under of this Article shall not hold more than of the share capital of the enterprise 6. Investment Areas Open to Foreign Investors Investment areas not listed under Articles 4 and 5 herein are open to foreign investors PART THREE INVESTMENT permit ACQUISITION OF EXISTING ENTERPRISE AND TRANSFER OF INVESTMENT PROJECT UNDER IMPLEMENTATION 7. Application for Investment Permit a Domestic and foreign Investor In order to obtain investment permit any domestic investor must fill out a or online application form and investment organ submit same to the appropriate accompanied by the following documents Where the application is filed by an agent a copy of valid authorization documents Where the investment is to be made by a sole proprietor a copy of the individual s identity card or an identity card or other documents bestowing a domestic investor status and two recent passport photo size photographs 5 12767 . Federal negai Gazette 2020 page the investment is to be made by a business organization a copy of its memorandum of association per and Articles of Association and commercial registration certificate or Where the business no panama pal TE is to be newly established draft to pi is Cel memorandum of association and articles of association copy of each shareholder s identity card or identity card or other documents bestowing a domestic investor status and two recent passport photo size photographs ofthe general manager Where the investment is to be made by a public enterprise or project company established under we partnership a copy of the regulation or decision by which it was established or a copy of its 3 Memorandum of Association and Articles of association pro Where the investment is to be made by a cooperative 2. want society a copy of its articles of association be Application for Investment Permit by a Foreign Investor In order to obtain investment permit any foreign investor must fill out a or online submit same to the application form and Commission accompanied by the following documents a Where the application misfiled by an agent a copy of a valid authorization documents Where the investment is to be made by a sole proprietor a copy of of a valid passport showing his identity and two recent passport photo size ie EF 5 be . 12768 Federal neural No 78. page en dad per . Where the investment is to be made by an Ethiopian national permanently residing abroad who prefers treatment as 8 foreign investors a copy of document his permanent residence abroad and two recent passport photo size photographs Where the investment is to be made by a business organization be in ethiopian Draft Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association of the business organization 8 copy of of a valid passport of each shareholders showing his identity and two recent passport photo size photographs of the general manager of the business organization Where the business organization has a foreign national member who can be considered a domestic investors a copy of an identity card or other relevant document establishing such status Where there is a business organization in the business organization a copy of its Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association or similar constitution documents commercial registration certificate and a copy of minutes of resolution passed by authorized organ of the parent business organization resolving to engage in investment activity in ethiopian branch of a business organization incorporated abroad car an 12769 FE Federal 888 gyrene not september 3000 pyre i copy of Memorandum of Association and Articles of Associations or similar constitution document as wel a commercial registration PE certificate of the parent business organization copy of document attesting appointment of the branch manager ang his two recent passport photo cut size photographs and a copy of of a valid passport or identity card of the manager art A copy of minutes of resolution of the authorized heres organ of the parent business Organization resolving poe to establish 8 branch business organization in . ethiopian Document financial position or profile of he investors whe med 0 8 the investors when deemed appropriate commission under of this Article originating from outside of Ethiopia must be authenticated by foreign and domestic bodies authorized 10 authenticate documents RAD Ee is 9.886 for Investment Expansion or Upgrading Permit In order 10 obtain Investment expansion or upgrading permit any investor must fill out o or egg online application form and submit same the appropriate investment Organ accompanied by the following documents . afr per to my Where the application is filed by an agent a copy ol per valid authorization documents ang Two recent passport photo size photographs of the investor or where the investment 15 made by a 5. 8 . business organization the general manager ieve . Federal negan gene Nu 78. to page 1. wrath . Fra . the be 10. Investment Permit Issuance and Usage i Upon receipt of an application made in accordance with Articles 8 or 9 of this regulations the appropriate investment organ shall alter examining the proposed investment activity of the proclamation this investor in light of the Regulation and other applicable laws a Where it approves the application issue investment permit to the applicant or investor right away or Where it rejects the application notify the applicant or investor in writing of the reason for the rejection within three working days from the date following the date of application The appropriate investment organ shall after issuing the investment permit notify concerned institutions for necessary follow up A holder of an investment permit may not be required to obtain a business license until the commencement of production or rendering of service upon completion of the project The investment permit must however be renewed every year as provided under Article 11 sub Article of the Proclamation An investment permit may not be transferred without prior written approval of the appropriate investment organ Where an investment peanut is transferred another person or where any change is made to its content it shall be submitted to the appropriate investment organ for approval 58 . 12771 No 15. A pta did if 11. Acquisition of Existing Enterprise A foreign investor seeking to buy an existing enterprise or a share thereof must submit a paper based or online application to the commission The commission in reviewing an application filed in accordance with of this article must ascertain that the enterprise is engaged in investment areas open to foreign investors and that the minimum capital requirement provided in the Proclamation and other requirements laid down under the Commercial Registration and Business Licensing Proclamation and other applicable laws are met Subject to the provision of of this 3 article a foreign investor applying to buy an existing enterprise or a share thereof must advice the necessary clearance from the Ministry of Trade and Industry and the Ministry of revenues The Commission shall after examining the request in accordance with and of this article a Where it approves the application replace the business license or register the share transfer right away or be Where it rejects the application notify the investor in writing of the reason for the rejection within three working days from the date following the date of application the Eid 12772 BE eric . Federal negai gene No 78. september 3030 rig . AL 12. Transfer of Investment Project under Implementation of investor who wishes to transfer to another . piety investment project under implementation for which a business license is not yet issued must obtain the approval of the investment organ by submitting 8 or online application The investor shall together with application for approval of the transfer of an investment project submit the following documents PE a copy of renewed investment permit a A copy of sale agreement registered with notary public and per Where land was received for the project a copy of document showing that the land is transferred to the buyer The appropriate investment organ after examining the application shall a Where it accepts the application approve the project transfer right away Where it rejects the application notify the investor in writing of its decision for the the date following the date of application 2 7 Federal arctic No . September 2 50 12773 fire PART FOUR PROCEDURES FOR SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION . TE and ga pay . to 28. Ii MY OF INVESTMENT PERMIT 13. Procedure for Suspension of Investment Permit Where it is believed that an investor has committed any of the violations stated under Article 13 sub Article of the proclamation he shall be given a by investment organ to take the necessary corrective written warning notice the appropriate measures or furnish adequate response within a period not exceeding 60 sixty working days Where an investor who has received a warning notice under of this Article fails 16 take the required corrective measure or to submit adequate response the appropriate investment organ may suspend the investment permit for the period provided in Article 13 subpar clue of the proclamation 14. Procedure for Revocation of Investment Permit OF revocation of Investment Permit i Before revoking an investment permit on the basis of grounds specified under Article 13 of the proclamation the appropriate investment organ shall notify the investor in writing of the reasons for the impending revocation measure the investor shall submit his written statement within 15 fifteen working days The appropriate investment organ may revoke the investment permit where the investor who received notification as per of this Article fails to respond or the response he provided is not found acceptable EE 5 eric . 12774 Federal September 2 2020 page ten pro per of PART FIVE REGISTRATION OF TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER AND COLLABORATION AGREEMENTS 15. Technology Transfer Agreement A technology transfer agreement registration request made pursuant to Article 15 of the Proclamation shall be accompanied by the following An application form signed by the technology recipient be A copy of technology transfer agreement concluded between the recipient and technology provider and registered with notary public A copy of valid business license or investment permit of the technology recipient and do A copy of the commercial registration certificate or business license or document ascertaining ownership of technology of the technology provider Documents under of this Article originating from outside of Ethiopia must be authenticated by foreign and domestic bodies authorized to authenticate documents Upon receipt of a complete application for registration in accordance with Sub Article article of this article the Commission shall pass a decision within 30 thirty working days having conducted the necessary review Where the Commission approve the request it shall register the agreement and issue a certificate of registration to the applicants where it rejects the application it shall notify the applicant of its decision in writing 3 5 . 12775 Federal No 78. september to 2020 8 Ii 8 pro The Commission shall establish detailed guideline for determining the of technology transfer agreement for managing collaboration with institutions having for the purpose of assessing technology content and as necessary for determining the conditions under which informational support may be provided to technology recipients 16. foreign Enterprise Collaboration A collaboration agreement registration request made pursuant to Article 16 of the Proclamation a An application form signed by a domestic investors A copy of a collaboration agreement between the domestic investor and a foreign enterprise registered with notary public A copy of a valid business license or investment permit of the domestic investors and A copy of the commercial registration certificate or business license of the foreign Documents under of this Article THis go enter . 12776 rodent negai gone . september 2020 page iz . to wey . registration in accordance with of this article the Commission shall render decision within 30 thirty working days having conducted the necessary review 4 Where the Commission approve the request it ol registration 10 the domestic investors where it rejects the application it shall notify the domestic investor of its decision in writing PART SIX CONDITION FOR OWNING A DWELLING house PROVISION OF SERVICE 17. Condition for owning Dwelling House foreign investor or 8 1 national treated 85 a domestic investor may own a dwelling house as per Article 18 of the Proclamation if he has ten invested 8 minimum us state widow prejudice to services provided in industrial parks or other service provision locations pursuant to industrial park laws the Commission shall register foreign direct capital and provide the services the relevant following representing Government executive organs if ii tae 1 federal . 78. september 2 2000 a Registration of Memorandum of association Articles of association and amendments thereto registration amendment replacement and cancellation of trade names and business names Registration in commercial register and issuance amendment replacement and cancellation of commercial registration certificate do issuance renewal replacement suspension and cancellation of expat work permit issuance renewal suspension replacement and revocation of business license and 0 Handling of investment incentive requests 8 accordance with the applicable law handling of requests for the transfer of construction materials capital goods spare parts and vehicles from one investor having . right another investor having the same right in accordance with the applicable law 27 The Ministry of Trade and Industry shall follow up that the renewal of business license 85 per sub Article paragraph of this Article is carried out in accordance with the law The pertinent Government Agencies shall set up desks and provide the following services at the Commissions one stop shop 5 FE boyfriend . 12778 Federal negai guten new september 2 page a Issuance of tax identification number be Issuance of residence permit Issuance of construction permit and do Approval of environmental impact assessment studies and issuance of certificate When necessary the Commission may determine to provide additional services supplementing the list under and of this article 4 Upon receipt of application for services provided under of this article the commission having ascertained completeness of the application and reviewed il pursuant to the applicable law shall a Where it approves the application provide the service requested by charging the proper feel and notify relevant Government organs of the service provided or accreditation issued for necessary or Where it rejects the application notify the investor or applicant in writing of the reason for the rejection 12779 EX 3 enter . Federal logan Gazette not 78. september 2000 page The appropriate investment organs shall provide support 19 requests of investors in respect of their investments 169 obtain land loan water electric . power telecom services as well 85 visa and residence permits tor themselves and their expat employees For implementation of this provisions relevant organs Federal Government and Regional State administrations must establish investment help desks that handle investors requests expeditiously PART SEVEN TRAINING AND TRANSFER OF KNOWLEDGE AND SKILL TO ETHIOPIAN EMPLOYEES 19. Procedure for the Training of and Transfer of An investor employing foreigners in permanent fields of occupation pursuant to Article 22 sub Article of the Proclamation is obliged to replace expat employees by Ethiopians within a clearly set timeframe by providing the needed on thejob training and facilitating the transfer of knowledge The investor must within three months of the issuance of business license submit to Commission 8 statement detailing the type and schedule of the training and thereafter a quarterly implementation report of the training program report submitted pursuant to of this Article shall contain the following details EE 5 . 12780 federal Gazette not 2 2020 Carer . i a The full name of the foreign national and the occupational field in which he is hired The full name and address of Ethiopians receiving the training The type of training offered and the duration for which the training lasts do Where Ethiopian trainees are not acquiring the necessary knowledge and skill to the extent and within the time desired an explanation thereon In collaboration with the Ministry of Trade and Industry and the Ministry of Labour and Social affairs the Commission shall prepare and implement a working guideline regulating matters specified under this Article and Article 22 of the proclamation PART EIGHT MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 20. Repealed and inexplicable Laws The Provisions on investment areas in the Investment incentives and Investment Areas Reserved for Domestic Investors Council of Ministers Regulation not amended are hereby repealed No regulations Directive or Customary practice shall in so far as it is inconsistent with this regulations be applicable with respect to matters provided for in this regulations . EF eric . Federal gazette 2 2020 page . it enter 21. repealed Provisions The provisions of the Investment Incentives and Investment Areas Reserved for Domestic Investors Council of Ministers Regulation not was amended relating to investment incentives shall remain valid until they are repealed by another law 22. Effective Date This Regulation shall come into force on the date of publication in Federal negai gazette Done at Addis Ababa On the Day of September 2020. abby AHMED dry PRIME MINSTER OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA