




Focus on Reading literature study guides are designed
to help all students comprehend and analyze their
reading. Many teachers have grappled with the question
of how to make quality literature accessible to all
students. Students who are already avid readers of
quality literature are motivated to read and are familiar
with prereading and reading strategies. However,
struggling readers frequently lack basic reading skills
and   are not equipped with the prior knowledge and
reading strategies to thoroughly engage in the
classroom literature experience.

Focus on Reading is designed to make teachers’ and
students’ lives easier! How? By providing materials that
allow all students to take part in reading quality
literature. Each Focus on Reading study guide contains
activities that focus on vocabulary and comprehension
skills that students need to get the most from their
reading. In addition, each section within the guide
contains  a before-reading Focus Your Reading page
containing tools to ensure success: Vocabulary Words
to  Know, Things to Know, and Questions to Think
About. These study aids will help students who may
not have the prior knowledge they need to truly
comprehend

the reading.

USING Focus on Reading

Focus on Reading is designed to make it easy for you
to meet the individual needs of students who require
additional reading skills support. Each Focus on Reading
study guide contains teacher and student support
materials, reproducible student activity sheets, an end-
of-book test, and an answer key.

• Focus on the Book, a convenient reference page for
the teacher, provides a brief overview of the entire
book including a synopsis, information about the
setting, author data, and historical background.

• Focus Your Knowledge, a reference page for
students, is a whole-book, prereading activity
designed  to activate prior knowledge and immerse
students in the topic.

The study guide divides the novel into 6 manageable
sections to make it easy to plan classroom time. Five
activities are devoted to each section of the novel.

Before Reading

• Focus Your Reading consists of 3 prereading
sections:

Vocabulary Words to Know lists and defines 10
vocabulary words students will encounter in their
reading. Students will not have to interrupt their
reading to look up, ask for, or spend a lot of time
figuring out the meaning of unfamiliar words. These
words are later studied in-depth within the lesson.

Things to Know identifies terms or concepts that are
integral to the reading but that may not be familiar to
today’s students. This section is intended to “level the
playing field” for those students who may not have
much prior knowledge about the time period, culture,
or theme of the book. It also gets students involved
with the book, increasing interest before they begin
reading.

Questions to Think About helps students focus on
the main ideas and important details they should

be looking for as they read. This activity helps give
students a purpose for reading. The goal of these
guiding questions is to build knowledge, confidence,
and comfort with the topics in the reading.

During Reading

• Build Your Vocabulary presents the 10 unit focus
words in the exact context of the book. Students are
then asked to write their own definitions and
sentences for the words.

• Check Your Understanding: Multiple Choice offers
10 multiple-choice, literal comprehension questions
for each section.

• Check Your Understanding: Short Answer contains
10 short-answer questions based on the reading.

After Reading

• Deepen Your Understanding is a writing activity
that extends appreciation and analysis of the book.
This activity focuses on critical-thinking skills and
literary analysis.

• End-of-Book Test contains 20 multiple-choice items
covering the book. These items ask questions that
require students to synthesize the information in the
book and make inferences in their answers.

iv


INTRODUCTION/CLASSROOM MANACEMENT v


ClASSRoom MANAGEmENT

Focus on Reading is very flexible. It can be used by the
whole class, by small groups, or by individuals. Each
study guide divides the novel into 6 manageable units
of study.

This literature comprehension program is simple to
use. Just photocopy the lessons and distribute them at
the appropriate time as students read the novel.

You may want to reproduce and discuss the Focus
Your Knowledge page before distributing the
paperbacks. This page develops and activates prior
knowledge  to ensure that students have a grounding in
the book before beginning reading. After reading this
whole-book prereading page, students are ready to dive
into  the book.

The Focus Your Reading prereading activities are the
keystone of this program. They prepare students for
what they are going to read, providing focus for the
complex task of reading. These pages should be
distributed before students actually begin reading the
corresponding section of the novel. There are no
questions to be answered on these pages; these are for
reference and support during reading. Students may
choose to take notes on these pages as they read. This
will also give students a study tool for review before the
End-of-Book Test.

The Focus Your Reading pages also provide an
excellent bridge to home. Parents, mentors, tutors, or

other involved adults can review vocabulary words with
students, offer their own insights about the historical
and cultural background outlined, and become familiar
with the ideas students will be reading about. This can
help families talk to students in a meaningful way about
their reading, and it gives the adults something concrete
to ask about to be sure that students are reading and
understanding.

The Build Your Vocabulary and Check Your
Understanding: Multiple Choice and Short Answer
activities  should be distributed when students begin
reading the corresponding section of the novel. These
literature guide pages are intended to help students
comprehend and retain what they read; they should be
available for students to refer to at any time during the
reading.

Deepen Your Understanding is an optional extension
activity that goes beyond literal questions about the
book, asking students for their own ideas and
opinions—and the reasons behind them. These
postreading activities generally focus on literary
analysis.

As reflected in its title, the End-of-Book Test is a
postreading comprehension test to be completed after
the entire novel has been read.

For your convenience, a clear Answer Key simplifies
the scoring process.



Focus on the Book


Synopsis

The narrator and protagonist of the story is Scout
Finch, a six-year-old girl (at the beginning of the story)
who lives with her brother, Jem, and their widowed
father, Atticus. The story takes place in the small
Alabama town of Maycomb during the Great
Depression.

Jem, Scout, and their friend Dill become fascinated
with their recluse neighbor Arthur Radley, nicknamed
Boo, who has not been seen outside of his house for
years. The children act out the story of Boo Radley from
rumors they have heard. The children find gifts in a
knothole of a tree on the Radley property and imagine
that Boo left them. Other incidents lead the children to
believe that Boo Radley may not be the evil person the
rumors suggest.

Atticus, a prominent lawyer, agrees to defend a black
man named Tom Robinson, who has been unjustly
accused of raping a white woman. As a result of
Atticus’s decision, Jem and Scout are harassed by other
children, while their father faces disapproval and angry
mobs. Atticus does his best to defend Tom Robinson.

Scout has faith in the goodness of the people in her
community. As the novel progresses, this faith is tested
by the hatred and prejudice that emerge during the
trial. Scout eventually develops a more mature
understanding that allows her to keep her faith in
human goodness without being blind to human evil.

About the Author

Nelle Harper Lee was born in 1926 in Monroeville,
Alabama. Located in southwest Alabama about halfway
between Montgomery and Mobile, Monroeville is
thought  to be the model for Maycomb in To Kill a
Mockingbird. The youngest of four children, Lee studied
law    at the University of Alabama and studied one year
at Oxford University. She spent the 1950s working for
Eastern Airlines and writing short stories. Her father’s
sudden illness forced her to divide her time between
New York and Monroeville. On the suggestion of her
editor, Lee developed one of her short stories into her
only novel, To Kill A Mockingbird, published in 1960.

To Kill a Mockingbird won the 1961 Pulitzer Prize and
spent eighty weeks on the bestseller list. The novel has
been translated into forty languages.

Historical Background

The setting of To Kill a Mockingbird is a small
southern town during the early 1930s—the time of
the  Great Depression. One of the causes of the Great
Depression was the stock market crash. From the end
of  World War I in 1919, the stock market prices kept
rising. On October 24, 1929, the stock market crashed.

Stock prices plummeted. On that one day, the value of
stocks fell fourteen billion dollars. Businesses started to
lay off people. Small stores closed their doors. Millions
of people lost all their savings. Many people ended up
sleeping in shelters for the unemployed, standing in
breadlines, and eating in soup kitchens. A few people
profited from the Great Depression, but most were left
with little money.

Alabama was a Confederate state during the Civil
War. At that time, most white residents in Alabama
viewed slavery as an integral part of their economic and
social systems, and they opposed attempts to abolish it.
Montgomery, Alabama, was the Confederate capital
until     May 1861. Alabama contributed about 100,000
troops to the Confederacy, and perhaps 25% of them
died during the Civil War. During the 1930s, race
relations between blacks and whites were still strained
and marked by prejudice. As depicted in To Kill a
Mockingbird, there were many white people during this
time   who believed in and supported racial equality, but
many people were still prejudiced against blacks.

It was not until the 1950s and 1960s, well after the
time period for the setting of To Kill a Mockingbird, that
civil rights efforts took off. Race relations were a major
issue in Alabama in the 1950s and 1960s, as civil rights
advocates worked to end racial segregation in the state.

During 1955–1956, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.,
organized a black boycott that ended racially separate
seating on municipal buses in Montgomery. In 1954,
the U.S. Supreme Court ruled racial segregation in
public schools to be unconstitutional. In 1963, four
black children were killed when a bomb exploded

in their Birmingham church. The incident, widely
deplored in the nation, helped to pass the federal Civil
Rights Act of 1964. In 1965, the U.S. Congress passed
the Voting Rights Act, which helped add many African
Americans to the voting rolls in Alabama.



To Kill a Mockingbird takes place in a small, rural, southern town in the 1930s. The setting of the
novel is important because it affects how the characters interact with one another. The setting
greatly influences the atmosphere, or background feeling, of the story.

• When you think of a small southern town during the 1930s, what comes to mind? How is the town
laid out? Is there a town center? What types of buildings would you picture in town?

• Now, imagine being a child in this town during the summer. What would you do for fun? How
would you occupy your days? How do you think these activities would be different from how a
child might spend the summer today?

• Imagine that you are a white child in this small southern town. Are there different classes of 
white
people? Are there black people in your neighborhood? Do you go to school with black children?
Do you have black servants? What do black people think of your family?

• As you read To Kill a Mockingbird, you will experience the events from the perspective of a young
white girl who happens to be a tomboy. What is your image of a southern lady? As you read the
novel, imagine the frustration and confusion that Scout, the young girl, feels as she is faced with
the stereotype of a southern lady.



VocQbulQry Words to Know

Study the following words and definitions. You will meet these words in your reading. Be sure to jot
down in your word journal any other unknown words from the reading.


detachment—indifference; absence of
prejudice or bias

tyrannical—having absolute authority

revelation—the act of revealing or
disclosing

asylum—an institution for the care of
people with physical or mental
impairments

entailment—to limit the inheritance of
property to a specified succession of
heirs; the state of being entailed

contentious—quarrelsome
disapprobation—moral disapproval;

condemnation

auspicious—attended by favorable
circumstances; favorable

arbitrated—decided in or as in the manner
of a judge

edification—intellectual, moral, or spiritual
improvement; enlightenment

Things to Know

Here is some background information about this section of the book.

Maycomb, Alabama, is the small southern town where To Kill a Mockingbird takes place.

The Gray Ghost is a book written by Seckatary Hawkins. Hawkins is the pseudonym, or pen name,
of Robert F. Schulkers.

Meridian, Mississippi, is the town where Dill lives during the school year.

Hookworms are parasites that usually enter the body through bare feet and move through the body
to the small intestines. There they attach themselves with a series of hooks around their mouths.

Indian-head pennies are pennies with a picture of an Indian head on the front side. This U. S. one-
cent coin was issued from 1859 until 1909. After that, the one-cent coin was issued with the wheat
sheaf on the reverse and Lincoln on the front. This penny is called the Wheat Penny.

“Foot-washing Baptist” refers to a religious fanatic, someone who believes that all pleasure is 
sinful.

         2          


         




Questions to Think About

The following questions will help you understand the meaning of what you read. You do not have to
write out the answers to these questions. Instead, look at them before you begin reading, and think
about them while you are reading.

1. Why do you think Scout and Jem are friends with Dill? What does Dill bring to the friendship?

2. How is school different in the book for the children of Maycomb County from what it is
today? How do different characters in the book feel about education?

3. How do you think Scout feels about Calpurnia?

4. Why are the children so interested in Boo Radley?

5. How do Scout and Jem feel about their father? Do they respect his wishes?




I. C HAP TERS 1–5 

 

Read the sentences below. On the line, write your definition of the word in bold type. Then, on
another sheet of paper, use that word in a new sentence of your own.

1. “Jem and I found our father satisfactory: he played with us, read to us, and treated us with
courteous detachment.”

detachment:                                                  

2. “She had been with us ever since Jem was born, and I had felt her tyrannical presence as long
as I could remember.”

tyrannical:                                       

3. “Dill had seen Dracula, a revelation that moved Jem to eye him with the beginning of
respect.”

revelation:                                   

4. “Miss Stephanie said old Mr. Radley said no Radley was going to any asylum, when it was
suggested that a season in Tuscaloosa might be helpful to Boo.”

asylum:                                  

5. “Entailment was only a part of Mr. Cunningham’s vexations. The acres not entailed were
mortgaged to the hilt  ”

entailment:                                                 

6.    “‘Ain’t  got  no  mother,’  was  the  answer,  ‘and  their  paw’s  [father’s]  right  
contentious.’”
contentious:                            

7. “‘Scout, you’d better not say anything about our agreement  I’m afraid our activities would

be   received   with   considerable   disapprobation   by   the   more   learned   authorities.’”
disapprobation:                         

8. “The remainder of my schooldays were no more auspicious than the first.”

auspicious:                                             

9. “Dill said he ought to be first, he just got here. Jem arbitrated, awarded me first push with an
extra time for Dill, and I folded myself inside the tire.”

arbitrated:                                   

10. “‘No,’ said Atticus, ‘putting his life’s history on display for the edification of the
neighborhood.’”

edification:                                               





I. C HAP TERS 1–5 

  

  

Check Your Understanding

Multiple Choice

Circle the letter of the best answer to each question.


1. Where do Atticus, Scout, and Jem Finch
live?

a. Maycomb, Alabama

b. Meridian, Mississippi

c. Montgomery, Alabama

2. Who is Calpurnia?

a. a kind neighbor

b. the Finches’ cook

c. Scout’s grade-school teacher

3. What happened to Scout and Jem’s
mother?

a. She died of a heart attack.

b. She’s in a mental institution.

c. She left Maycomb to live with her sister
in Montgomery.

4. Who taught Scout how to read?

a. her father

b. Miss Maudie

c. her brother, Jem

5. How do the Ewell children feel about
school?

a. School is a waste of time, and they do
not attend.

b. They attend school just like the other
children in the town.

c. They are home-schooled and learn to
read and write from their father.

6. Jem and Scout look forward to summer, to
sleeping on the porch and in the tree
house. Who do they look forward to
spending time with in the summer?

a. Dill

b. Uncle Jack

c. Boo Radley

7. What do Jem and Scout find in the knot-
hole of an oak tree at the Radley place?

a. a silver bell

b. a prayer book

c. Indian-head pennies

8. How do Scout and Jem feel about their
neighbor, Miss Maudie?

a. They are afraid of her.

b. They consider her a friend.

c. They don’t pay much attention to her.

9. What do the children want Boo Radley to
do?

a. to move out of town

b. to come out of the house

c. to send the children a letter

10. How does Atticus feel about the children
disturbing the Radleys?

a. He finds it amusing.

b. He isn’t aware of the children’s
activities.

c. He wants them to leave the Radleys
alone.






Check Your Understanding

Short Answer

Write a short answer for each question.

1. How would you describe Dill’s personality? What does he like to do? What type of stories
does he tell?

2. How does Miss Caroline react when she learns that Scout already knows how to read?

3. How does Mr. Cunningham pay Atticus Finch for his legal services?

4. How does Burris Ewell behave in school? Does he respect Miss Caroline?

5. How does Calpurnia feel when Scout begins school?

6. What is the first thing that Scout finds in the oak tree on the Radleys’ property?

7. Why are Scout and Jem so afraid when Scout gets rolled inside the tire? Where does she
end up?

8. Scout, Jem, and Dill entertain themselves by acting out a drama. What story do they act out?

9. How does Miss Maudie show her affection for Scout and Jem?

10. What is Jem, Scout, and Dill’s first attempt to communicate with Boo Radley?




Mood refers to the climate of feeling, or atmosphere, created by the author. How do the rumors
about Boo Radley and his family’s history affect the mood? Does the mood help spark your interest
in Boo Radley? Are you curious, or frightened? Give specific examples of passages that create the
mood from the first five chapters of the book.




VocQbulQry Words to Know

Study the following words and definitions. You will meet these words in your reading. Be sure to jot
down in your word journal any other unknown words from the reading.


malignant—showing great ill will; evil
desolate—dreary; dismal; sad
provocation—the act of deliberately

angering someone

deportment—a manner of personal
conduct; behavior

obstreperous—noisily and stubbornly
defiant

wrathful—fiercely angry
umbrage—offense; resentment
interdict—to    forbid authoritatively
palliation—making something (an offense

or a crime) seem less serious

propensities—natural inclinations;
tendencies

Things to Know

Here is some background information about this section of the book.

Strip poker is a poker card game in which the losing players in each hand must remove an article
of clothing.

The Rosetta Stone is a basalt tablet with inscriptions that gave the first clue to the meaning of
Egyptian hieroglyphics. It was discovered in 1799 near Rosetta, a town in northern Egypt in the
Nile River delta.

The Missouri Compromise was an 1820 measure worked out between the North and the South
and passed by the U.S. Congress that allowed for admission of Missouri as the 24th state (1821). It
marked the beginning of the prolonged sectional conflict over the extension of slavery that, along
with other issues, led to the American Civil War.

A hookah is an Eastern smoking pipe. It has a long tube passing through an urn of water that cools
the smoke as it is drawn through.

An Add-A-Pearl necklace is a traditional gift for a young girl that begins with one, three, or five
pearls on a 14-karat gold chain. As the years go by, the necklace may grow into a full strand of 
pearls
as friends and family add gifts of pearls.



Mockingbirds are gray-and-white birds of the southern and eastern United States noted for the
ability to mimic the sounds of other birds.

A Jew’s Harp is a small musical instrument consisting of a lyre-shaped metal frame that is held
between the teeth and a projecting steel tongue that is plucked to produce a soft twanging sound.

Morphine is a medication extracted from opium. It is a powerful, habit-forming narcotic used to
relieve pain. A morphine addict is physiologically or psychologically dependent on taking the drug.

Questions to Think About

The following questions will help you understand the meaning of what you read. You do not have to
write out the answers to these questions. Instead, look at them before you begin reading, and think
about them while you are reading.

1. Who plugged up the knot-hole in the oak tree, and why?

2. Why does Scout fight with her cousin Francis, and how does she feel about her Uncle Jack’s
reaction?

3. How does Scout and Jem’s opinion of their father change after he shoots the mad dog?

4. Why does Atticus want Jem to spend time with Mrs. Dubose?

5. Why are Aunt Alexandra and Mrs. Dubose critical of the way Scout dresses and behaves?
How do they think she should behave?


Build Your Vocabulary

Read the sentences below. On the line, write your definition of the word in bold type. Then, on
another sheet of paper, use that word in a new sentence of your own.

1. “Every night-sound I heard from my cot on the back porch was magnified three-fold; . . .
insects splashing against the screen were Boo Radley’s insane fingers picking the wire to pieces;
the chinaberry trees were malignant, hovering, alive.”

malignant:                                       

2. “The night-crawlers had retired, but ripe chinaberries drummed on the roof when the wind
stirred, and the darkness was desolate with the barking of distant dogs.”

desolate:                                               

3. “‘You like words like damn and hell now, don’t you?’ I said I reckoned so. ‘Well I don’t,’ said
Uncle Jack, ‘not unless there’s extreme provocation connected with ’em  ’”

provocation:                              

4. “Aunt Alexandra’s vision of my deportment involved playing with small stoves, tea sets, and
wearing the Add-A-Pearl necklace she gave me when I was born  ”

deportment:                              

5. “‘Such conduct as yours required little understanding. It was obstreperous, disorderly and
abusive—’”

obstreperous:                                           

6. “If she was on the porch when we passed, we would be raked by her wrathful gaze, subjected
to ruthless interrogation regarding our behavior, and given a melancholy prediction on what
we would amount to when we grew up, which was always nothing.”

wrathful:                                                    

7. “I wasn’t sure what Jem resented most, but I took umbrage at Mrs. Dubose’s assessment of the
family’s mental hygiene.”

umbrage:                                                    

8. “What Jem did was something I’d do as a matter of course had I not been under Atticus’s

interdict, which I assumed included not fighting horrible old ladies.”

interdict:                                                    

9. “She was a less than satisfactory source of palliation, but she did give Jem a hot biscuit-and-
butter which he tore in half and shared with me.”

palliation:                                

10. “  that is, Mrs. Dubose would hound Jem for a while on her favorite subjects, her camellias

and our father’s nigger-loving propensities;  ”

propensities:                                


Check Your Understanding

Multiple Choice

Circle the letter of the best answer to each question.


1. When Jem returned to free his pants from
the fence, what did he discover?

a. The pants were missing.

b. The pants had been mended.

c. The pants were cut into ribbons.

2. What do Jem and Scout find in the knot-
hole of the oak tree that frightens them?

a. a knife

b. a witch figurine

c. carved figures of a boy and girl

3. What frightens Scout and makes her think
the world is coming to an end?

a. It begins snowing in Maycomb.

b. The Finches’ house catches fire.

c. She hears gunshots in the night.

4. What does Jem do during the snowstorm?

a. He goes sledding.

b. He builds a snowman.

c. He shovels Miss Maudie’s walkway.

5. How do Jem and Scout know Boo Radley
came out during Miss Maudie’s house fire?

a. He put a blanket around Scout.

b. They see his footprints in the snow.

c. They saw him helping with the fire.

6. Why does Scout stop herself from fighting
Cecil Jacobs?

a. She feels sorry for Cecil.

b. She is afraid Cecil will hurt her.

c. Her father has asked her not to fight.

7. Why does Scout break her promise to her
father and punch her cousin Francis?

a. Francis calls Scout’s father a nigger-
lover.

b. Francis calls Scout a baby and laughs
at her.

c. Francis makes fun of Dill and calls him
a thief.

8. What happens to Harry Johnson’s mad
dog, Tim Johnson?

a. Jem shoots him with Atticus’s rifle.

b. Atticus shoots him with Heck Tate’s
rifle.

c. He gets sick and dies of a heart attack.

9. What does Jem do out of anger at Mrs.
Dubose’s insults?

a. Jem throws Scout’s baton through Mrs.
Dubose’s window.

b. Jem yells back at Mrs. Dubose and calls
her a “horrible old lady.”

c. Jem uses Scout’s baton to cut the tops
off of Mrs. Dubose’s camellias.

10. What does Mrs. Dubose have delivered to
Jem after her death?

a. a camellia

b. her alarm clock

c. the book he had been reading to her


Short Answer

Write a short answer for each question.

1. Who sealed up the knot-hole in the oak tree, and why?

2. Why does Scout feel she may be partially responsible for the unusual snowstorm?

3. How does Miss Maudie react when her house burns down?

4. Why does Atticus agree to defend Tom Robinson despite the negative reaction of the
townspeople?

5. Why does Scout tell her Uncle Jack that he doesn’t understand children?

6. Why do Scout and Jem think of their father as old and weak before the Tom Robinson case?

7. According to Miss Maudie, why is it a sin to kill a mockingbird?

8. Why are Scout and Jem so surprised when Atticus shoots Tim Johnson?

9. Mrs. Dubose criticizes Atticus for two reasons. What are they?

10. Why do Jem and Scout have to read to Mrs. Dubose for longer and longer each day?



Discussions about guns appear in several scenes throughout the novel. What does Atticus think
about bravery and guns? What does he think about the children’s fascination with guns? What does
Atticus hope Jem will learn about bravery from spending time with Mrs. Dubose?



Study the following words and definitions. You will meet these words in your reading. Be sure to jot
down in your word journal any other unknown words from the reading.


altercation—a loud quarrel
melancholy—sad; depressed; thoughtful
denunciation—a public announcement of

disapproval

formidable—inspiring awe, admiration, or
wonder

prerogative—an exclusive right or privilege
held by a person or group

caste—a social class separated from others
by distinctions of hereditary rank,
profession, or wealth

futility—uselessness
morbid—psychologically unhealthy
elucidate—to     make clear or plain; to clarify
unobtrusive—not noticeable;

inconspicuous

Things to Know

Here is some background information about this section of the book.

During the Great Depression, sit-down strikes became a real force in labor relations in the United
States. These are nonviolent strikes in which protesters sit down at the site of an injustice and 
refuse
to move for a specified period of time or until goals are achieved. A famous example is the Flint
(Michigan) sit-down strike of 1936–1937, in which auto workers sat down on the job for forty-four
days   in protest for union recognition.

Octagon Soap was a harsh lye soap intended primarily for laundry, but often used as an
all-purpose soap.

The Garden of Gethsemane was where Jesus went to pray on the night before his crucifixion. It was
in this garden that he was arrested by Roman soldiers.

Prohibition was the period (1920–1933) during which the 18th Amendment forbidding the
manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages was in force in the United States.

Bootleggers are people who make, sell, and/or transport alcoholic liquor for sale illegally.
The War Between the States was the American Civil War (1861–1865).



Reconstruction was the period of time, roughly between 1867 and 1877, when the Southern states
were reorganized and reestablished after the Civil War.

A venue is the locality where a crime is committed or a cause of action occurs. It may also be the
locality from which a jury is called and in which a trial is held. In certain cases, the court has 
power
to change the venue, which is to direct the trial to be held in a different county from that where 
the
crime was committed.

The Ku Klux Klan is a secret society organized in the South after the Civil War to reassert white
supremacy by means of terrorism.

Braxton Bragg was the commander of the Western Confederate Army during the Civil War. Bragg
led a less-than-distinguished career in the military, and his army unit was eventually defeated.

A Mennonite is a member of an Anabaptist church characterized particularly by simplicity of life,
pacifism, and nonresistance.

Questions to Think About

The following questions will help you understand the meaning of what you read. You do not have to
write out the answers to these questions. Instead, look at them before you begin reading, and think
about them while you are reading.

1. Where does Calpurnia take the children, and what do they learn there?

2. How does Aunt Alexandra think Atticus should raise his children? What are her prejudices
about class and heredity?

3. Why do Heck Tate and Link Deas come to Atticus’s house? What are they concerned about?

4. Why do the men appear outside the Maycomb County jail at night?

5. How does Scout help her father when he is faced with the angry group of men?



Read the sentences below. On the line, write your definition of the word in bold type. Then, on
another sheet of paper, use that word in a new sentence of your own.

1. “After one altercation when Jem hollered, ‘’t’s time you started bein’ a girl and acting right!’
I burst into tears and fled to Calpurnia.”

altercation:                                               

2. “Line for line, voices followed in simple harmony until the hymn ended in a melancholy

murmur.”

melancholy:                                                  

3. “His sermon was a forthright denunciation of sin  ”

denunciation:                                                 

4.    “.  .  .  Aunt  Alexandra’s  was  once  an  hour-glass  figure.  From  any  angle,  it  was  
formidable.”
formidable:                             

5. “She was never bored, and given the slightest chance she would exercise her royal prerogative:

she would arrange, advise, caution, and warn.”

prerogative:                                                  

6. “There was indeed a caste system in Maycomb, but to my mind it worked this way: the older
citizens, the present generation of people who had lived side by side for years, were utterly
predictable to one another  ”

caste:                                     

7.    “I  began  to  sense  the  futility   one  feels  when  unacknowledged  by  a  chance  
acquaintance.”
futility:                              

8. “‘’t’s morbid, watching a poor devil on trial for his life. Look at all those fools, it’s like a
Roman carnival.’”

morbid:                                       

9. “We asked Miss Maudie to elucidate: she said Miss Stephanie seemed to know so much about
the case she might as well be called on to testify.”

elucidate:                                                    

10.   “I  found  myself  in  the  middle  of  the  Idlers’  Club  and  made  myself  as  
unobtrusive  as  possible.”
unobtrusive:                    




1. For whom is Reverend Sykes collecting
donations at First Purchase Baptist
Church?

a. Calpurnia

b. Bob Ewell

c. Helen Robinson

2. What question does Calpurnia tell Scout to
ask her father, saying that he can explain it
better?

a. What’s rape?

b. What’s a Mennonite?

c. What’s the Ku Klux Klan?

3. What is under Scout’s bed?

a. Dill

b. a snake

c. Boo Radley

4. When a group of men appear at the
Finches’ door to discuss Tom Robinson’s
trial, what does Jem say to break up the
group and avoid trouble for his father?

a. “Scout needs your help!”

b. “The telephone’s ringing!”

c. “Calpurnia says it’s dinner time.”

5. Why does Atticus sit outside the door of
the Maycomb County jail?

a. to prepare for the trial

b. to wait for Tom Robinson’s arrival

c. to protect Tom Robinson from angry
townspeople

6. One of the men in the mob outside the jail
at night is Walter Cunningham’s father.
What does Scout do to keep Mr.
Cunningham from harming her father?

a. She kicks him.

b. She talks to him kindly.

c. She tells him about Walter’s troubles at
school.

7. Who says, “’t’s morbid watching a poor
devil on trial for his life” and refuses to go
to watch Tom Robinson’s trial?

a. Calpurnia

b. Miss Maudie

c. Miss Stephanie

8. Where do Scout and Jem sit in the
courthouse?

a. with Atticus and Tom Robinson

b. in the balcony with the black people

c. at the back of the courthouse

9. How did Atticus come to represent Tom
Robinson in the trial?

a. Atticus offered to defend Tom
Robinson.

b. Tom requested Atticus Finch as his
lawyer.

c. The court appointed Atticus to defend
Tom Robinson.

10. What is Judge Taylor’s interesting habit?

a. He eats constantly during a trial.

b. He sleeps during the proceedings.

c. He sometimes chews on an unlit cigar.



1. What do Aunt Alexandra and Atticus argue about?

2. What does Jem do when Dill runs away from home and turns up in Scout’s bedroom? Why
does Scout feel that Jem “broke the remaining code of our childhood”?

3. Dill explains to Scout the real reason he ran away from home. What does he say? How does
Scout feel about his reason?

4. Why does Dill think Boo Radley has never tried to run away?

5. Why do Scout and Jem follow Atticus the night he goes to the Maycomb County jail?

6. Scout runs to her father as he faces the group of men outside of the jail. She expects him to be
happy to see her, but what is Atticus’s reaction?

7. Scout tries to distract the men outside of the jail. What does she talk to Mr. Cunningham
about?

8. How does Dill show his respect for Atticus after the scene outside of the jail?

9. After the mob breaks up, is Atticus angry with Jem for disobeying?

10. Jem says, “... around here, once you have a drop of Negro blood, that makes you all black.”
What does he mean by this statement? What issue is he referring to?


On two occasions in this part of the novel, Atticus faces a group of angry townspeople. In both
cases, the mob breaks up and leaves without incident. Atticus explains to his children that a mob is
just made up of people. Mr. Cunningham came to his senses because “you children last night made
Walter Cunningham stand in my shoes for a minute. That was enough.”

What does Atticus mean about standing in someone’s shoes? What does he hope Jem and Scout will
learn from this experience about judging or criticizing other people?



Study the following words and definitions. You will meet these words in your reading. Be sure to jot
down in your word journal any other unknown words from the reading.


acrimonious—bitter and sharp in language
or tone

benignly—showing gentleness and
mildness; kindly

complacently—in a self-satisfied and
unconcerned manner

articulate—expressing oneself easily in clear
and effective language

volition—a conscious choice or decision

collective—made by a number of people
acting as a group

predicament—a situation that is difficult to
get out of; a dilemma

perpetrate—to be responsible for; to
commit

corroborative—supporting (evidence)

temerity—foolhardy disregard of danger;
recklessness

Things to Know

Here is some background information about this section of the book.

Before the invention of refrigerators, people used iceboxes, large wood cabinets kept cold on the
inside by blocks of ice that were delivered to the home.

Model-T Ford (also known as a “tin Lizzie” or a “flivver”) was Henry Ford’s first popular success.
Originally produced in 1909, it was an affordable and relatively reliable automobile.

A chiffarobe is a dresser or portable closet with drawers on the side.

A cotton gin is a machine used to separate seed and other debris from cotton.

Mr. Jingle is a character in Charles Dickens’s novel The Pickwick Papers. Mr. Jingle usually 
expresses
himself in sentence fragments.

Ex cathedra remarks are statements made with the authority derived from one’s office or position.

The “distaff side of the Executive branch” is a reference to Eleanor Roosevelt, the wife of 
President
Franklin D. Roosevelt (the Executive branch is the President, and distaff, in this case, means 
“wife”).
Eleanor Roosevelt was often criticized, especially in the South, for her views on civil rights.



Albert Einstein (1979–1955) was a German-born American theoretical physicist whose special and
general theories of relativity revolutionized modern thought on the nature of space and time and
formed a theoretical base for the exploitation of atomic energy.

John D. Rockefeller (1839–1937), one of the richest men in America at the time of the novel, was an
oil magnate who amassed great wealth through the Standard Oil Company. He spent about half of
his fortune on philanthropic works.

Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826) was the third president of the United States (1801–1809) and an
author of The Declaration of Independence.

Questions to Think About

The following questions will help you understand the meaning of what you read. You do not have to
write out the answers to these questions. Instead, look at them before you begin reading, and think
about them while you are reading.

1. Why does Atticus question Heck Tate so thoroughly about which side of Mayella’s face was
beaten?

2. Why is Mayella so angry with Atticus when she first takes the witness stand?

3. Why is it impossible for Tom Robinson to have done all of the things Mayella accused him of?

4. Why is it a mistake for Tom Robinson to say that he felt sorry for Mayella?

5. What do the children discover about Mr. Dolphus Raymond and his lifestyle?



Read the sentences below. On the line, write your definition of the word in bold type. Then, on
another sheet of paper, use that word in a new sentence of your own.

1. “We could tell, however, when debate became more acrimonious than professional, but this
was from watching lawyers other than our father.”

acrimonious:                                     

2.    “Judge  Taylor  stirred.  He  turned  slowly  in  his  swivel  chair  and  looked  benignly  
at  the  witness.”
benignly:                              

3. “Mr. Ewell wrote on the back of the envelope and looked up complacently to see Judge Taylor
staring at him as if he were some fragrant gardenia in full bloom on the witness stand  ”

complacently:                                                 

4. “Suddenly Mayella became articulate. ‘I got somethin’ to say,’ she said.”

articulate:                                                    

5. “He seemed to be a respectable Negro, and a respectable Negro would never go up into
somebody’s yard of his own volition.”

volition:                                         

6. “Below us, the spectators drew a collective breath and leaned forward. Behind us, the Negroes
did the same.”

collective:                                                    

7. “Until my father explained it to me later, I did not understand the subtlety of Tom’s
predicament: he would not have dared strike a white woman under any circumstances and
expect   to live long  ”

predicament:                                     

8.    “I  had  never  encountered  a  being  who  deliberately  perpetrated   fraud  against  
himself.”
perpetrated:                            

9. “‘. . . absence of any corroborative evidence, this man was indicted on a capital charge and is
now on trial for his life  ’”

corroborative:                                                 

10. “‘And so a quiet, respectable, humble Negro who had the unmitigated temerity to “feel sorry”
for a white woman has had to put his word against two white people’s.’”

temerity:                                                    



1. Where in Maycomb does the Bob Ewell
family live?

a. next to the town cemetery

b. behind the town garbage dump

c. across from the county courthouse

2. How does Atticus prove that Bob Ewell is
left-handed?

a. He throws a ball to Mr. Ewell.

b. He asks Mr. Ewell to write his name.

c. He asks Mayella under oath whether
her father is left-handed.

3. What makes Mayella think that Atticus is
making fun of her?

a. He shakes her hand.

b. He calls her Miss Mayella.

c. He takes notes during her testimony.

4. Who, from the courtroom audience,
speaks out in support of Tom Robinson’s
character?

a. Scout

b. Link Deas

c. Mr. Gilmer

5. How does Dill react during Mr. Gilmer’s
cross-examination of Tom Robinson?

a. He cries.

b. He falls asleep.

c. He shouts out in anger.

6. What does Mr. Dolphus Raymond give
Dill to settle his stomach?

a. whiskey

b. Coca-Cola

c. cough syrup

7. What does Atticus do halfway through his
closing statement that shocks Jem and
Scout?

a. Atticus removes his coat.

b. Atticus wipes away a tear from his eye.

c. Atticus puts his hands on Tom’s
shoulders.

8. According to Atticus in his closing
statement, in which human institution are
“all men created equal”?

a. a court

b. a church

c. a school

9. How does Atticus discover that his
children are in the courtroom?

a. Mr. Underwood tells him.

b. Scout runs to her father during a recess.

c. Atticus spots them in the balcony
during his closing statement.

10. What does Reverend Sykes tell Scout to do
as her father exits the courtroom at the
close of the trial?

a. applaud

b. stand up

c. follow him



1. What is the one beautiful thing on the Ewells’ property that seems out of place?

2. According to Mr. Ewell’s testimony, why didn’t he call a doctor for Mayella?

3. Despite Mayella’s testimony, who do you think really beat up Mayella, and why?

4. What is Judge Taylor’s unusual habit? Why is Dill impressed with Judge Taylor?

5. Why does Scout feel that Mayella Ewell “must have been the loneliest person in the world”?

6. Why is Dill so upset with Mr. Gilmer’s cross-examination of Tom Robinson?

7. Why does Dolphus Raymond pretend to be an alcoholic?

8. What does Atticus say motivated Mayella to accuse Tom Robinson of rape?

9. Atticus states that Tom Robinson’s accusers subscribe to an evil assumption. What is that
assumption?

10. Scout seems to have a premonition about Tom’s fate as she waits in the courtroom. How does
Scout describe the atmosphere of the courtroom just before the verdict is read?


Through the voice of Scout, Harper Lee uses imagery to depict the character of Bob Ewell in the
courtroom. When Mr. Ewell first takes the stand, she says, “a little bantam cock of a man rose and
strutted to the stand, the back of his neck reddening at the sound of his name.”

Can you find other instances in this part of the novel where Mr. Ewell is described as a rooster? 
How
do Harper Lee’s descriptions of Bob Ewell make you feel about the man?



Study the following words and definitions. You will meet these words in your reading. Be sure to jot
down in your word journal any other unknown words from the reading.


impassive—revealing no emotion;
expressionless

credibility—believability

statute—a law enacted by a legislature

vehement—characterized by forcefulness of
expression or intensity of emotion

sordid—morally degraded

apprehension—fearful or uneasy
anticipation of the future

impertinence—disrespectfulness
brevity—the quality of being brief in

duration; concise

demise—death; the end of existence

recluse—a person who withdraws from the
world to live in seclusion

Things to Know

Here is some background information about this section of the book.

Mrunas are a tribe in Africa. At one of Aunt Alexandra’s missionary society meetings, Mrs.
Merriweather describes how sorry she feels for these people and how J. Grimes Everett is the only
one   who will help the Mrunas.

Birmingham is a city in Central Alabama.

Mrs. Roosevelt refers to First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt (1884–1962), wife of President Franklin D.
Roosevelt. The reference “tryin’ to sit with ’em” in the novel refers to the 1939 incident in which
Eleanor Roosevelt attended a meeting for the Southern Conference for Human Welfare in
Birmingham, Alabama. She defied state authorities by sitting in the center aisle, between whites and
blacks, after police told her she was violating segregation laws by sitting with black people.

A roly-poly is also called a pill bug, or any small beetle of the genus Byrrhus, having a rounded
body, with the head concealed beneath the thorax allowing it to roll into a ball.

Adolf Hitler (1889–1945) was the Nazi dictator of Germany from 1933 to 1945.

A holy-roller is a member of a small religious sect that expresses devotion by shouting and moving
around during worship services.

        26          


         


  22–26 

B EF ORE 

  

Focus Your Reading (continued)

Uncle Natchell was the cartoon mascot for a fertilizer product called Natural Chilean Nitrate of
Soda. Many of the advertisements for this product were in comic strip or story form. In the novel,
Little Chuck Little thinks one of these advertising “stories” is an actual current event.

Elmer Davis was a journalist and CBS radio commentator who went on to head the Office of War
Information.

Questions to Think About

The following questions will help you understand the meaning of what you read. You do not have to
write out the answers to these questions. Instead, look at them before you begin reading, and think
about them while you are reading.

1. Why did Judge Taylor choose Atticus to defend Tom Robinson?

2. Why is Atticus so understanding when Bob Ewell threatens him and spits in his face?

3. What is Jem’s reasoning for believing that the court system should do away with juries?

4. What is Jem’s theory about why the Finches, the Cunninghams, the Ewells, and the Robinsons
are different?

5. Why does Scout say she feels more at home in her father’s world than in Aunt Alexandra’s?

        

         




 

Read the sentences below. On the line, write your definition of the word in bold type. Then, on
another sheet of paper, use that word in a new sentence of your own.

1. “Atticus was standing under the street light looking as though nothing had happened: his vest
was buttoned, his collar and tie were neatly in place, his watch-chain glistened, he was his
impassive self again.”

impassive:                                

2.   “‘I  destroyed  his  last  shred  of  credibility  at  that  trial,  if  he  had  any  to  
begin  with.’”
credibility:                        

3. “He said he didn’t have any quarrel with the rape statute, none whatever, but he did have deep
misgivings when the state asked for and the jury gave a death penalty on purely circumstantial
evidence.”

statute:                                                      

4. “I looked up, and his face was vehement. ‘There’s nothing more sickening to me than a low-
grade white man who’ll take advantage of a Negro’s ignorance.’”

vehement:                                  

5. “‘I guess it’s to protect our frail ladies from sordid cases like Tom’s.’”

sordid:                                                      

6. “Rather nervous, I took a seat beside Miss Maudie  Ladies in bunches always filled me with

vague apprehension and a firm desire to be elsewhere  ”

apprehension:                                                 

7.   “Miss  Stephanie  eyed  me  suspiciously, decided  that  I  meant  no  impertinence,  and  
contented
herself  with, ‘Well, you  won’t  get  very  far  until  you  start  wearing  dresses  more  
often.’”
impertinence:                            

8. “‘I’m sure you do,’ Miss Maudie said shortly  When Miss Maudie was angry her brevity

was icy.”

brevity:                                

9. “Maycomb had lost no time in getting Mr. Ewell’s views of Tom’s demise and passing them
along through that English Channel of gossip, Miss Stephanie Crawford.”

demise:                                

10. “I sometimes felt a twinge of remorse, when passing by the old place, at ever having taken part
in what must have been sheer torment to Arthur Radley—what reasonable recluse wants
children peeping through his shutters  ”

recluse:                                                      

        28          


         


  22–26 

  

  

Check Your Understanding

Multiple Choice

Circle the letter of the best answer to each question.


1. When Bob Ewell accused Atticus of being
too proud to fight, how did Atticus
respond?

a. Atticus said he was too old to fight.

b. Atticus walked away without saying a
word.

c. Atticus pushed Mr. Ewell aside and
walked away.

2. Why can’t Miss Maudie serve on the jury
if she wants to?

a. She is too old.

b. She is a woman.

c. She lives in the same county as Tom
Robinson.

3. According to Atticus, who is the one
person on the jury who had trouble
agreeing to the guilty verdict?

a. Link Deas

b. Dolphus Raymond

c. Walter Cunningham

4. Why does Aunt Alexandra say that Scout
cannot invite Walter Cunningham over?

a. He is trash.

b. He is too dirty.

c. He is too old for her to play with.

5. Jem thinks he has discovered why Boo
Radley never comes out of his house.
What is Jem’s reason?

a. Boo Radley is insane.

b. Boo Radley wants to stay inside.

c. Boo Radley’s father makes him
stay inside.

6. Why is Mrs. Merriweather concerned that
the “cooks and field hands are dissatisfied”
about Tom Robinson’s conviction?

a. She feels that the verdict was unfair.

b. She finds it annoying to deal with
unhappy servants.

c. She thinks they will no longer work for
white people.

7. How does Tom Robinson die?

a. He starves himself.

b. Another prison inmate stabs Tom.

c. He is shot and killed trying to escape.

8. How does Helen Robinson react when
Atticus comes to tell her the news of her
husband’s death?

a. She collapses into the dirt.

b. She runs screaming into a field.

c. She turns her back on Atticus.

9. In Scout’s class at school, what topic leads
to a discussion of democracy?

a. Tom Robinson’s trial

b. sit-down strikes in Birmingham

c. Hitler and his persecution of the Jews

10. According to Atticus, why is Jem not acting
like himself?

a. He is dealing with his feelings about
the trial.

b. Jem is interested in girls.

c. Jem is anxious about gaining weight
for football.

        29          


         


  22–26 

  

  

Check Your Understanding

Short Answer

Write a short answer for each question.

1. How does the black community feel about Atticus after Tom Robinson is convicted?

2. Why does Miss Maudie make a small cake for Scout and Dill but give Jem a piece from a
large cake?

3. What does Dill say he wants to be when he grows up?

4. How did Bob Ewell react to Atticus when he ran into him after the trial?

5. How does Atticus finally realize how frightened his children are about Mr. Ewell’s threats?

6. Why is it significant that the jury took a few hours instead of a few minutes to reach a 
verdict?

7. What does Scout tell Mrs. Merriweather she wants to be when she grows up?

8. In the Maycomb Tribune, to what does Mr. Underwood compare Tom’s death?

9. Scout is reminded of Arthur Radley as a person when she thinks about the things he left in
the tree: the Indian-head pennies, the soap dolls, and so on. What is her fantasy surrounding
Boo Radley?

10. What troubles Scout about her teacher, Miss Gates’s, condemnation of prejudice?

        30          


         


  22–26 



  

Deepen Your Understanding

In Chapter 24, Aunt Alexandra hosts a missionary society meeting. Here the women discuss the
Mrunas of Africa and the work being done to “help” them. The women feel sorry for the people of
this  far away African tribe, and Mrs. Merriweather says of the Mrunas, “Not a white person’ll go 
near
’em but that saintly J. Grimes Everett.”

How does the women’s concern for the Mrunas compare to their attitude toward the black people
of Maycomb county? Why do you think Harper Lee introduces the missionary society meeting to
the novel? Does the portrayal of Mrs. Merriweather and Mrs. Farrow help the reader understand
the prejudice of the time?

        31          


         


VI. C HAP TERS 27–31 

B EF ORE 

  

Focus Your Reading

VocQbulQry Words to Know

Study the following words and definitions. You will meet these words in your reading. Be sure to jot
down in your word journal any other unknown words from the reading.


purloined—stole, often in a violation of
trust

ascertain—to discover with certainty
reeling—thrown off balance and falling
instinctive—arising from a natural impulse;

spontaneous and unthinking

turmoil—extreme upset

garishly—glaringly; dazzlingly
audible—able to be heard
disengaged—pulled back; released from

something binding
amiable—friendly
acquiescence—passive agreement

Things to Know

Here is some background information about this section of the book.

When millions of Americans were out of work during the Great Depression, the government
instituted the Works Progress Administration, or WPA, and employed over eight million people.

The Ladies’ Law, from the Criminal Code of Alabama, Vol. III, 1907, reads: “Any person who enters
into, or goes sufficiently near to the dwelling house of another, and, in the presence or hearing 
of the
family of the occupant thereof, or any member of his family, or any person who, in the presence or
hearing of any girl or woman, uses abusive, insulting or obscene language must, on conviction, be
fined not more than two hundred dollars, and may also be imprisoned in the county jail, or
sentenced to hard labour for the county for not more than six months.”

National Recovery Act (NRA) was a series of programs set up to help the nation, especially the
nation’s businesses, recover from the effects of the Great Depression. It was ruled unconstitutional
by  the Supreme Court in 1935. “NRA—We do our part” was the motto of the NRA.

“Nine old men” is a reference to the nine members of the Supreme Court.

        32          


         


VI. C HAP TERS 27–31 

B EF ORE 

  

Focus Your Reading

Questions to Think About

The following questions will help you understand the meaning of what you read. You do not have to
write out the answers to these questions. Instead, look at them before you begin reading, and think
about them while you are reading.

1. What events occur in Maycomb during this part of the novel that make Bob Ewell look
suspicious?

2. What causes the Maycomb ladies to organize a Halloween festival and Mrs. Merriweather to
write a pageant?

3. What happens to Scout and Jem on their way home from the pageant?

4. Why does the Sheriff insist that Mr. Ewell killed himself by falling on the knife? Who is Mr.
Tate trying to protect?

5. Why does Scout feel sad when Boo returns to his home?

        33          


         


VI. C HAP TERS 27–31 

 

Read the sentences below. On the line, write your definition of the word in bold type. Then, on
another sheet of paper, use that word in a new sentence of your own.

1. “Miss Tutti was sure those traveling fur sellers who came through town two days ago had

purloined their furniture.”

purloined:                                   

2. “After consulting a tree to ascertain from its lichen which way was south, and taking no lip
from the subordinates who ventured to correct him . . .”

ascertain:                                                    

3. “I took one giant step and found myself reeling: my arms useless, in the dark, I could not keep
my balance.”

reeling:                                                      

4.    “For  once  in  his  life,  Atticus’s  instinctive  courtesy  failed  him:  he  sat  where  
he  was.”
instinctive:                         

5. “His age was beginning to show, his one sign of inner turmoil, the strong line of his jaw
melted a little, one became aware of telltale creases forming under his ears  ”

turmoil:                                         

6. “They were white hands, sickly white hands that had never seen the sun, so white they stood
out garishly against the dull cream wall in the dim light of Jem’s room.”

garishly:                                           

7. “When Mr. Tate spoke again his voice was barely audible.”

audible:                                     

8. “I ran to him and hugged him and kissed him with all my might  Atticus disengaged

himself and looked at me.”

disengaged:                                                  

9. “‘Well, I think I’ll stay with you for a while.’ ‘Suit yourself,’ said Atticus. It must have 
been after
midnight, and I was puzzled by his amiable acquiescence.”

amiable:                                         
acquiescence:                     

        34          


         


VI. C HAP TERS 27–31 

  

  

Check Your Understanding

Multiple Choice

Circle the letter of the best answer to each question.


1. What is Scout’s costume for the Halloween
pageant?

a. a cow

b. a ham

c. a sheep

2. How much money does Jem give Scout to
spend at the Halloween festival?

a. five cents

b. thirty cents

c. two dollars

3. What happens to Scout when it is her turn
to come on stage during the pageant?

a. She trips and falls off the stage.

b. She falls asleep and misses her cue.

c. She gets stage fright and refuses to
come on.

4. Who do Jem and Scout think is following
them home after the pageant?

a. Arthur Radley

b. Mrs. Maudie

c. Cecil Jacobs

5. In the dark, how does Scout know that
they are under the big oak tree?

a. She hears the wind rustle the leaves.

b. The ground feels colder under her feet.

c. Her hands brush the knot-hole in the
tree.

6. Who asks to leave the room after hearing
about Bob Ewell’s death?

a. Scout Finch

b. Atticus Finch

c. Aunt Alexandra

7. What is the first thing that Scout says to
Arthur Radley when she sees him in her
house?

a. “Hey, Boo.”

b. “Who are you?”

c. “Thank you for saving us.”

8. Where does Atticus lead Scout and Arthur
Radley to talk after Dr. Reynolds arrives?

a. the kitchen

b. the living room

c. the front porch

9. After checking to see how Jem is doing,
what does Boo ask of Scout?

a. to walk him home

b. to give Jem a book

c. not to tell anyone about him

10. What does Atticus read to Scout the night
of Bob Ewell’s attack?

a. the Bible

b. The Gray Ghost

c. the Maycomb Tribune

        35          


         


VI. C HAP TERS 27–31 

  

  

Check Your Understanding

Short Answer

Write a short answer for each question.

1. What happens to Helen Robinson, and who comes to her assistance?

2. Why is it important that Scout is wearing her Halloween costume during the attack by
Bob Ewell?

3. What happens to Bob Ewell, and who is responsible?

4. Why is Scout so surprised when Dr. Reynolds greets Arthur Radley casually?

5. Why does Atticus suggest that Scout, Boo, and Mr. Tate talk out on the front porch rather than
in the living room?

6. Why is Atticus hesitant to go along with Heck Tate’s cover-up of Bob Ewell’s death?

7. How does Scout explain to her father that she understands why it is necessary to cover up the
truth about Bob Ewell’s death?

8. When Scout brings Boo Radley to Jem’s bedside, what does she sense that Boo would like
to do?

9. What does Scout feel she’s given Boo Radley? Why is she sad when he returns home?

10. Why does Scout want Atticus to read The Gray Ghost to her?

        36          


         




 

  

Deepen Your Understanding

Authors often use a literary device called foreshadowing in their writing to suggest or hint at an
event in the plot before it occurs. In To Kill a Mockingbird, how does Harper Lee foreshadow Bob
Ewell’s attack on the children and Boo Radley’s goodness?

What earlier events lead up to the climactic scene on Halloween night?

        37          


         


WHOLE 

B O OK 

 

  

End-of-Book Test

Circle the letter of the best answer to each question.


1. What did Boo Radley once do that resulted
in the sheriff locking him in

the courthouse basement?

a. He broke into Judge Taylor’s home.

b. He stabbed his father with scissors.

c. He broke the windows in the town hall.

2. How does Scout gain her special
knowledge of the Cunninghams?

a. Mr. Cunningham is Atticus’s client.

b. Mr. Cunningham works with Atticus.

c. Scout has always played with Walter
Cunningham, Jr.

3. What is Scout, Jem, and Dill’s favorite
pastime during the summer?

a. swimming in the creek

b. reading books in the tree house

c. play-acting the Boo Radley stories

4. What does Jem want to be one day?

a. a lawyer

b. a teacher

c. a football player

5. What happens the night Jem and Dill
attempt to peek in Boo’s window?

a. Nathan Radley shoots at them.

b. Boo Radley runs after them but can’t
catch them.

c. Atticus stops them before they reach
the Radleys’ fence.

6. According to Nathan Radley, why did he
fill the knot-hole in the oak tree?

a. The tree was dying.

b. He didn’t want the children climbing
the tree.

c. He didn’t want animals to nest there.

7. What fearful event awakens the town of
Maycomb during the middle of the night?

a. Miss Maudie’s house is on fire.

b. Lightning sets fire to the Maycomb
County Courthouse.

c. Miss Stephanie calls the sheriff because
someone is breaking into her house.

8. Why is Uncle Jack so angry with Scout
when she visits Aunt Alexandra?

a. She lies to him.

b. She uses bad language.

c. She is disrespectful to Aunt Alexandra.

9. Why does Jem become so angry with Mrs.
Dubose that he destroys her garden?

a. She said that Jem and Scout were trash.

b. She said that Calpurnia could not be
trusted.

c. She criticized Jem’s father for defending
a black man.

10. What does Reverend Sykes do when the
congregation does not donate enough
money for Helen Robinson?

a. He donates the needed amount himself.

b. He says that there would be no church
service until the necessary amount is
raised.

c. He locks the doors of the church and
won’t let anyone leave until enough
money is raised.

(continued)

        38          


         


WHOLE 

B O OK 

 

  

End-of-Book Test (continued)


11. According to Atticus, who will never come
back to Maycomb?

a. Aunt Alexandra

b. Roman Catholics

c. the Ku Klux Klan

12. Why is Scout surprised that Mr.
Cunningham is one of the men who
threatens Atticus outside the jail?

a. She thought he was a friend.

b. She thought he was a coward.

c. She thought he supported Tom
Robinson.

13. Why did Mayella really ask Tom Robinson
to come into the house?

a. She wanted to make her father angry.

b. She was attracted to him and wanted
his attention.

c. She wanted him to chop up a dresser to
use for firewood.

14. Why does Scout have to leave during Mr.
Gilmer’s cross-examination of Tom
Robinson?

a. She feels sick and wants to leave the
courtroom.

b. She leaves with Dill because he can’t
stop crying.

c. Jem makes her leave because the trial is
not appropriate for her to watch.

15. Aunt Alexandra thinks that background
and gentle breeding determine social class.
What does Jem think determines class?

a. money

b. education

c. kindness

16. Why is Scout impressed with Aunt
Alexandra after hearing about Tom
Robinson’s death?

a. She cancels the missionary society
meeting and asks everyone to leave.

b. She continues to be a gracious hostess
at the missionary society meeting.

c. She goes with Atticus to tell Helen
Robinson the news of her husband’s
death.

17. What current event discussed in school
leads Scout to wonder how people can
“be ugly about folks right at home”?

a. poverty and breadlines

b. labor strikes in Michigan

c. Adolf Hitler’s dictatorship

18. How does Helen Robinson support her
family after Tom’s death?

a. She goes on welfare.

b. She works as a cook.

c. She moves in with her sister’s family.

19. How does Scout react when she sees Boo
Radley for the first time?

a. She runs and hugs him.

b. She speaks to him kindly.

c. She cries and runs to Atticus.

20. How did Bob Ewell really die?

a. Atticus shot him with his shotgun in
self-defense.

b. Link Deas shot him with his rifle to
protect Helen Robinson.

c. Arthur Radley stabbed him with a knife
to protect Jem and Scout.

        39          


Answer Key


I. CHAPTERS 1–5

Build Your Vocabulary

Wording of definitions may vary. Students may
remember the definitions given in the Vocabulary
Words   to Know section of Focus Your Reading, or
they may refine the definition based on the context
of the sentence and the reading overall. Students’ new
sentences will vary.



Check Your Understanding: Short Answer

1. Dill is adventurous and likes to tell fantastic
stories. His stories are imaginative, and Jem and
Scout have trouble believing many of them.

2. Miss Caroline is angry that Scout has already
learned to read and feels that learning at home
will interfere with her learning to read properly.

3. He has little money, so he pays Atticus in goods
such as firewood and nuts.

4. Burris Ewell despises Miss Caroline and feels
that school is a waste of time. He only attends
the first day of every year.

5. Calpurnia misses Scout’s company when she
goes to school. Calpurnia bakes cracklin’ bread
for Scout and kisses her when she comes home.

6. two sticks of chewing gum

7. Scout rolls out of control and ends up at the
foot of the Radleys’ front steps.

8. They act out the legendary story of Arthur
Radley stabbing his father with scissors.

9. She talks to them as friends and bakes cakes for
them to take home to their father.

10. They attach a note to the end of a fishing pole
and attempt to stick it through the shutters of
the Radleys’ front window.

Deepen Your Understanding

Answers will vary.

II. CHAPTERS 6–11

Build Your Vocabulary

Wording of definitions may vary. Students may
remember the definitions given in the Vocabulary
Words   to Know section of Focus Your Reading, or
they may refine the definition based on the context
of the sentence and the reading overall. Students’ new
sentences will vary.



Check Your Understanding: Short Answer

1. Mr. Radley filled the knot-hole with cement to
stop Boo from leaving things for Scout and
Jem.

2. Mr. Avery says that when children disobey their
parents, the season will change, and Scout feels
guilty for disobeying her father and bothering
the Radleys.

3. She has a positive attitude and says she always
wanted a smaller house to have more space for
her gardens.

4. Atticus feels it is his duty as a lawyer, as a
member of the town, and as a father to give
the man a fair trial.

5. Uncle Jack doesn’t ask Scout to explain her side
of the story before punishing her for hitting
Francis.

6. Atticus is almost fifty, older than many of the
other parents. He works in an office, doesn’t
hunt or play poker, and is almost blind in
one eye.

7. Miss Maudie says, “Mockingbirds don’t do one
thing but make music for us to enjoy.”

8. They didn’t know he had a talent for shooting a
gun and that his nickname was One Shot when
he was a boy. Scout and Jem thought they knew
everything about their father.

9. She thinks that Atticus lets his children run
wild, and she disapproves of him helping or
lawyering for a black person.

40


ANSwER KEY 41


10. Mrs. Dubose is trying to break a morphine
addiction before she dies, and listening to the
story  is a distraction.

Deepen Your Understanding

Answers will vary.

III. CHAPTERS 12–16

Build Your Vocabulary

Wording of definitions may vary. Students may
remember the definitions given in the Vocabulary
Words   to Know section of Focus Your Reading, or they
may refine the definition based on the context of the
sentence and the reading overall. Students’ new
sentences  will vary.



Check Your Understanding: Short Answer

1. Alexandra disagrees with the way Atticus is
raising his children, and she feels that Calpurnia
is  not needed. She feels that Scout and Jem should
live up to their name and their “gentle breeding.”

2. Jem tells Atticus that Dill is there. He acts
maturely and feels it is wrong to let Dill’s mother
worry about him any longer. In this instance, Dill
takes the perspective of an adult rather than a
child.

3. Dill explains that his mother and step-father are
not mean to him. They buy him things and care
for him, but he feels that they don’t really want
him around. Dill says that “they do get along a lot
better without me.” Scout feels needed and
wanted  by Jem, Atticus, and Calpurnia. She has
trouble understanding how Dill’s parents could
not need him.

4. Unlike Dill, who has his Aunt Rachel and the
Finches in Maycomb County, Boo Radley may
not have anywhere else to go or anyone else to
help him.

5. Scout and Jem are curious because Atticus takes
an extension cord with a light on one end and

says he’s going out for a while. Jem feels uneasy
and says, “I’ve just got this feeling.”

6. Atticus is frightened for his children’s safety and
tells them to go home.

7. Scout tries to think of topics that would interest
Mr. Cunningham. She talks about his son Walter
and the family’s entailment.

8. He offers to carry the chair home for him.

9. No, Atticus doesn’t seem angry. He tousles Jem’s
hair, which Scout says is Atticus’s “one gesture
of affection.”

10. Jem refers to children with parents of two
different races. They have trouble fitting in or
being accepted by either race.

Deepen Your Understanding

Answers will vary.

IV. CHAPTERS 17–21

Build Your Vocabulary

Wording of definitions may vary. Students may
remember the definitions given in the Vocabulary
Words   to Know section of Focus Your Reading, or they
may refine the definition based on the context of the
sentence and the reading overall. Students’ new
sentences  will vary.


Check Your Understanding: Short Answer

1. jars of carefully grown, brilliant red geraniums,
thought to be Mayella’s

2. He says he had never called a doctor in his life,
and it would have cost him five dollars.

3. Her father beat her because he was furious that
she made advances or was looking for attention
from Tom Robinson.

4. Judge Taylor doesn’t smoke a cigar, but he chews
on it. Dill is impressed with the judge’s aim when
he spits into the spittoon.

5. She has no friends. White people think of her
family as trash, and black people don’t want
anything to do with her because she is white.


42   


6. He thinks it is sickening the way Mr. Gilmer talks
to Tom, calling him “boy” and sneering. Atticus
did not talk that way to Mr. Ewell or Mayella.

7. He does this so that people can blame his
alcoholism for the way he lives. Dolphus doesn’t
want  to change, and he doesn’t want people to
pressure him to do so.

8. Mayella acted out of guilt. Her desire for Tom
Robinson was socially unacceptable, and the only
way for her to hide her disgrace was to accuse
him of taking her against her will.

9. The assumption is “that all Negroes lie, that all
Negroes are basically immoral beings, that all
Negro men are not to be trusted with our
women.”

10. She feels as if the courtroom is a cold, “deserted,
waiting, empty street,” even though it is filled
with people.

Deepen Your Understanding

Answers will vary.

V. CHAPTERS 22–26

Build Your Vocabulary

Wording of definitions may vary. Students may
remember the definitions given in the Vocabulary
Words  to Know section of Focus Your Reading, or
they may refine the definition based on the context
of the sentence and the reading overall. Students’
new sentences will vary.


Check Your Understanding: Short Answer

1. The black community shows its support and
respect for Atticus by bringing generous amounts
of food to his house.

2. She acknowledges that Jem is more grown-up
than the other two children.

3. He says that he can’t do anything about the way
people act, so he wants to be a clown who laughs
at people.

4. Mr. Ewell spits in Atticus’s face and tells him that
he will get even with him.

5. He notices that they aren’t eating and show little
interest in their usual activities.

6. The fact that the jury deliberated at all is a
positive sign for race equality. Atticus sees this as
a beginning.

7. She doesn’t know how to respond and says
simply, “Just a lady.”

8. He likens Tom’s death to the senseless slaughter
of songbirds (mockingbirds).

9. She imagines talking with him just as she would
with any friendly neighbor.

10. She overhears Miss Gates make discriminating
remarks against blacks, yet the teacher feels it is
wrong of Hitler to persecute the Jews. Scout
realizes that Miss Gates is a hypocrite.

Deepen Your Understanding

Answers will vary. You may want to introduce the
literary term irony and discuss how Harper Lee includes
the missionary society meeting as a contrast to the
women’s attitudes toward the black citizens of
Maycomb.

VI. CHAPTERS 27–31

Build Your Vocabulary

Wording of definitions may vary. Students may
remember the definitions given in the Vocabulary
Words   to Know section of Focus Your Reading, or they
may refine the definition based on the context of the
sentence and the reading overall. Students’ new
sentences  will vary.


Check Your Understanding: Short Answer

1. Bob Ewell harasses and frightens Helen on her
way to work, and Link Deas comes to her defense.

2. The chicken wire of the costume protects Scout
from Mr. Ewell’s attack, but it also hinders her
ability to see what is going on.


ANSwER KEY 43


3. Boo Radley stabs Mr. Ewell in the chest with a
kitchen knife to save Scout and Jem.

4. It seems as if Dr. Reynolds knows Arthur well,
and Scout realizes that even Arthur Radley may
need to see the doctor occasionally.

5. Atticus senses that Boo Radley would be more
comfortable on the dimly lit porch than under
the bright lights of the living room.

6. Atticus is afraid that lying will threaten his
integrity with his children, and he doesn’t want
to lose their respect or trust.

7. Scout says that telling the truth would be like
“shootin’ a mockingbird.”

8. Scout starts to sense Boo’s body language and
knows that he would like to touch Jem.

9. Scout feels that Boo has given her and Jem so
much and that they have given him nothing. She
feels sad that she has never given in return.

10. The plot of the story reminds her of Boo Radley
because people misunderstand a character in the
book and realize at the end that they were wrong
about him.

Deepen Your Understanding

Answers will vary. Answers may include Bob Ewell’s
threats against Atticus after the trial, as well as his
suspicious behavior toward the judge and Helen
Robinson, foreshadow his attack on the children; Aunt
Alexandra’s premonition and the ominous dark night
of Halloween creates tension leading to the attack;

the presents Jem and Scout find in the oak tree, the
mended pants, and the blanket for Scout foreshadow
the eventual discovery of Boo Radley’s goodness.
