AN INVESTMENT GUIDE TO ETHIOPIA

Ethiopia  A Preferred Investment Destination in Africa
MEIC
ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
LATEX? AT0+Fert hell?
CONTENTS
Ethiopia at a glance
5) Why invest in Ethiopia?
6 Areas of investment opportunities and incentives
18 Setting up an investment
22 Operating an investment
23 Factors at a glance
28 Legal and Institutional Framework
32 Annexes
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia A
2);
iy]
pe !
BY
h
Official Name: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia Currency: Ethiopian Birr (ETB)
Political system: Federal State with a multi-party system Geo-specific information:
ountry Code: +251
Capital City: Addis Ababa, seat of the African Union (AU) and Time Zone: CMT. L3
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA)
Location: Horn of Africa, at the crossroads between Africa, the
Middle East and Asia
Area: 1.1 million square kilometres EK,  es
LT a Ld SEA
. fh, FrARAT 4
Population: 2nd most populous country in Africa with a Bl ST AY a ;
population size of over 100 million
Language: Working Federal language - Amharic,
English is widely spoken
Exports: Leading exports: coffee, oilseeds, gold, pulses,
horticulture, live animals, growing manufacturing export (textile and
apparel, leather and leather products etc)
\ arbi
d alg biETN
Climate: Temperate in the highlands: 20C - 30C, low in the
lowlands: up to 45C
Rainfall ranges from 200 mm to 2000 mm and highly suitable for
production.  oN
An Investment Guide t@8Et
2 Why invest in Ethiopia?
Ethiopia has become a preferred destination for foreign direct investment and emerging Favourable market factors
hub for manufacturing in Africa due to its:
Political stability and committed government .
* Stable socio-economic governance with sustained peace and security.
e High level political commitment for investment promotion and protection; investment 
policy making is led by the Ethiopian Investment Board chaired by the Prime Minister
e Ranked 34th /138 economies for impartial public decision making (Global
Competitiveness Report, 2016). 
* Wide-ranging incentive packages for priority sectors and export-oriented investments.
e Bold initiative in the development of state-of-the art industrial parks, electric-powered
railway connecting the capital and other economic corridors to the port of Djibouti.
Africa's second most populous nation with a population size close to 100 million.
54 million active labour force, trainable and available at competitive wage rate.
Duty-free, quota-free access to the USA and EU markets through AGOA and EBA,
respectively
Duty-free, quota-free access to Japan, Canada, China, Turkey, Australia and New
Zealand  covering substantially all export goods from Ethiopia. Preferential market
access to India.
Member of COMESA with preferential market access to a regional market of 400
million people.
Strategic location with proximity to the Middle East, Europe and Asia.
Well developed infrastructure
Conducive economic factors
* An average of about 11% annual GDP growth for the last 14 years, one of the *
fastest growing economies in the world during the same period (World Bank Global
Economic Prospects).
e Stable and conducive macroeconomic environment. .
* Implementing phase Il of its Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II) which aims to
realize a structural transformation of the economy.
 46% growth in FDI inflow one of the most dynamic and largest FDI recipients in
Africa (UNCTAD World Investment Report, 2017).
Newly built Addis-Djibouti electric-powered railway
Africas world-class and Star Alliance member Ethiopian Airlines flying to about 100
international passenger and 36 dedicated cargo destinations; also flies to over 20
domestic passenger destinations
Huge investment potential in renewable energy including hyrdo, wind and geotermal;
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam  the largest hydroelectric power dam in Africa
 under construction (close to 60% completed), expected to generate additional
6,000MW electricity.
Expanding telecommunication services.
Expansive road networks connecting national and regional markets.
Two operational and seven upcoming government industrial parks; eight private
industrial parks in the pipeline.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Areas of investment opportunities and incentives
e Vision: To become the leading manufacturing hub in Africa.
e Ethiopia offers a remarkable competitive advantage for manufacturing industries due
to:
- government facilitation of efficiency-enhancing investment solutions including
industrial parks that are ready for plug and play;
- large pool of trainable work force available at competitive wages;
- cheapest energy rate on a global standard;
- geographic proximity and preferential access to key markets; and
- abundance of high-quality industrial raw materials;
e Ethiopia is Africas largest raw material supplier for the leather industry.
e Priority areas for investment: Textile & apparel, leather & leather products, agro-
processing, pharmaceuticals, chemical products, metal & engineering industry,
electronics & electrical products, paper & paper products, and construction materials.
Income tax exemption incentive:
- Up to 10 years corporate income fax exemption
1. Up to 6 years exemption depending on sector of engagement;
2. Additional 2-4 years exemption for industrial park enterprises with at least
80% export or input supply to exporters;
3. Additional 2 years exemption for 60% exporters or input suppliers to exporters
within or outside of industrial parks;
4. Additional 30% deduction for 3 consecutive years if investment in
underdeveloped regions).
- Up to 14 years corporate income tax exemption for pharmaceutical manufacturers
located in industrial parks:
1. Up to 14 years exemption for manufactures of active pharmaceutical
ingredients (varying based on export levels)
2. Up to 12 years exemption for manufactures of formulation and final medicine
(varying based on export levels)
3. Up to 8 years exemption for manufactures of pharmaceutical packaging
materials (varying based on export levels)
- Up to 5 years personal income tax exemption for expatriate employees of industrial
park enterprises (tenants) following issuance of business license.
e Incentives
Industrial Parks Development
- 10-15 years income tax exemption for development of industrial parks depending
on park location (10 years if in Addis Ababa or Special Zones of Oromia
 The government places significant importance to industrial parks development and surrounding Addis Ababa, and 15 years in other areas.
expansion i i ) i
- 60-80 years land lease right at promotional rate; with sub-lease right.
* Investors (domestic and foreign) can engage in industrial parks development
- Reliable electricity at globally competitive rate  government avails dedicated
* Two operational and seven upcoming government industrial parks X : )
power substation for industrial parks.
* One operational and seven upcoming privately developed industrial parks:
- Eastern Industrial Park: Located in Dukem, 400 ha (total size), 267 (phase I),
operational . - SE
- George Shoe Industrial Park: Located in Modjo, 100 ha, leather and leather products  -- 4 -
- Huajian International Industrial Park: Located in Lebu (South Western outskirts of rE -
Addis Ababa), 184 ha, leather and others
- Hunan-Adama Industrial Park: Located in Adama, 120 ha, heavy machinery and
equipment
- CCECC Dire Dawa Industrial Park: Located in Dire Dawa, 1500 ha, mixed
- CCCC Arerti Industrial Park: Located in Arerti, 100 ha (phase I), building materials gun
and furniture
- Vogue Industrial Park: Located in Mekelle, 100 ha, textile and apparel
* Located along key economic corridors, connected to ports by electric-powered
railway lines and roads
* Anchored on the principles of:
- Specialized Parks: Enhancing economy of scale and efficiency through the
development of sector-specific specialized industrial parks;
- Export Promotion: Government provision of industrial park incentives targeted at
increased export performance and competitiveness;
- Sustainability: Maintaining high environmental standards through the use of
renewable energy and zero liquid discharge (ZLD) technology; assuring social
sustainability and local linkages;
- Vertical Integration: Enhancing forward and backward linkages in the economy;
and
- Skills Development and Competitiveness: Developing workers skills for enterprise
productivity and competitiveness.
Hawassa Industrial Park-
Eco Industrial Park
Cluster/ Specialization: Textile & apparel
Area: 1.4 million m2 (Phase 1)
Mekelle Industrial Park
Cluster/ Specialization: Textile & apparel,
Footwear & Leather products
Area: 10 million m2
den
Guif of 4
Aysha IP
2
Seg
WW Dire Dawa IP
Arorti IP
Be.
Adama
Bole Lemi Industrial Park
(land I)
Cluster/ Specialization: Textile and apparel,
leather and leather products
Area: 3.5 million m2
Kombolcha Industrial Park
Dire Dawa Industrial Park
Cluster/ Specialization: Open for multiple
sectors, focused on export as it is the
closest to port Djibouti
Arerti Industrial Park
Cluster/ Specialization: Building materials
& furniture
Area: Tmillion m2
Adama Industrial Park
Footwear, Machinery fabrication
Kilinto Industrial Park
Cluster/ Specialization: Pharmaceuticals
Area: 2.8 million m2
Debre Berhan Industrial Park
Cluster/ Specialization: Agro-processing
Ethiopia is a conducive investment destination for commercial farming.
It is endowed with large land size (8th largest country in Africa and 27th in the world)
and huge proportion of arable land, diverse topography and agro-climatic zones, a
long growing season, fertile soils and water availability for irrigation.
Close to 5,000 ha of suitable land is designated for development of horticulture
clusters
Ethiopia is:
- Africas leading producer and exporter of coffee Arabica and ranks 5th in the world.
Known as the birthplace of coffee, Ethiopia is home to some of the worlds best
specialty coffee varieties such as Harrar, Sidama, Yirgacheffe and Limmu;
- 2nd largest flower exporting country in Africa;
- Regional lead in livestock resource and among top 10 in the world; and
- Continental lead in honey and beeswax production.
Priority areas for investment: Horticulture (flowers, fruits, vegetables and herbs),
plantation of cotton, palm tree, rubber tree, coffee, tea, sugarcane, oilseeds, livestock,
apiculture, and high-value crops such as barley for malting.
* Income tax exemption incentive: -
- Up to 9 years income tax exemption.
- Additional 2 years exemption if 60% of product is directly exported or supplied to an
exporter,
- Additional 30% deduction for 3 consecutive years if investment in underdeveloped
regions as defined under Investment Regulation No. 270/2012.
LAND OF ORIGINS
<Thio pia
Known as Land of Origins, Ethiopia is among the worlds best destination for
tourism with strong service industry to support the sector.
e Ethiopia is home to several cultural and historical heritage sites, nine of which are
included in the UNESCO list of world heritage.
e Priority areas for investment: Tourism, grade one tour operation, star designated
hotels, lodges & restaurants, grade one construction, information & communications
technology (ICT) and general & specialized hospitals.
* Income tax exemption incentive: Up to 5 years income tax exemption for hotel
and tour services in non-traditional tourism destinations as defined by the Ethiopian
Investment Board; 4-5 years exemption for investment in ICT development.
Energy
e Ethiopia has a tremendous potential for renewable energy generation - hydropower
generating capacity of about 45,000 MW, wind power of about 10,00 MW, and
geothermal capacity of about 5,000 MW.
e Private sector investment in power generation is highly encouraged.
 Income tax exemption incentive:
- 4 to 5 years exemption for investment in electricity generation.
Mining
e Ethiopia has a wide variety of untapped mineral resources and offers opportunities in
upstream and downstream operations.
e Ethiopia is the only producer of opal in Africa, major gold exporter, and emerging
country for oil and natural gas exploration.
* Mining potentials: gold, potash, platinum, opal, iron, tantalum, marble, granite,
limestone etc
e Incentives:
-Lower corporate income tax rate of 25% for large-scale mining projects
-Loss carry forward for 10 years.
-Accelerated depreciation on straight line basis over useful life of four years.
-Customs duty and other tax free import of equipments, machinery, vehicles and
consumables.
Other incentives
Facilitations
Import duty exemption - on import of capital goods, construction materials, spare
parts with a value up to 15% of the total value of capital goods (100% of total value
for industrial park enterprises that are fully exporters), motor vehicles required for
investment operation, raw materials needed for the production of export commodities,
and personal effects for residents in industrial parks.
Investors buying the above items from the local market can seek refund of the duty
paid.
Export duty exemption  on all products except semi-processed hides and skins
Loss carry forward  a right to carry forward loss incurred within the period of
income tax exemption for half of the income tax exemption period after expiry,
maximum being 5 years
One-stop shop and aftercare services under the EIC (both at head office and industrial
park branches)
Customs facilitation through bonded warehouse and voucher schemes
Expedited visa procedure - expedited procedure of securing entry, work permit and
certificate of residency
The right to own immovable property as per investment needs
The right to open and operate foreign currency accounts
The right to employ expatriate managers and experts
Ethiopia is a member of
the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA) and
the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO).
Protection and guarantee
Constitutional guarantee to property rights
Guarantee for repatriation of profits, dividends and other funds
Ethiopia is a member of the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) and the
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
Ethiopia has signed over 30 Bilateral Investment Treaties and several Double
Taxation Avoidance Agreements  providing investors with utmost protection
Ranked 80th/190 economies for ease of enforcing commercial contracts  rating of
OECD standard (World Bank's Doing Business Report, 2017)
Setting up an investment
Investment
establishment with
support from EICs
aftercare service
In order to start a new investment or acquire an existing business, review the full Thinking to
investment cycle and specific requirements below. expand or
upgrade your /) E || (
investment with
incentive from the APRS ATGIeTE beds
government? Get permit every year
investment permit until establishment
for expansion is completed and
the production
kick starts
Renew investment
Get business license and
start production or service.
Renew business license
every year
A foreign investor can establish its business either as a sole proprietorship or business
organization. In doing so, it has to comply with the following requirements:
A foreign investor can engage in any sector listed under the Investment Proclamation
No. 769/2012 and Regulation No. 270/2012 (both as amended), except the few sectors
reserved for domestic investors, Ethiopian nationals or the government in the same laws.
The Investment Proclamation sets a minimum capital requirement on foreign investors as
below:
e USD 200,000 for a single investment project by a foreign investor
e USD 150,000 if joint investment with a domestic investor
e USD 100,000 if the investment is on architectural or engineering works or related
technical consultancy services, technical testing and analysis or in publishing
work, and is solely owned by a foreign investor, and USD 50,000 if joint
investment with a domestic investor in the specific sectors
* No capital requirement for reinvestment of profit or dividend
Visa requirements
* Business or investment visa is required for all foreign visitors to Ethiopia, except for
nationals of Kenya.
* Visa applications can be obtained at Ethiopias diplomatic missions overseas
* The Main Department for Immigration and Nationality Affairs issues a residence
permit to a foreign investor up on submission of an investment permit issued in his/
her name.
* Aforeign investor who is a share holder of a company or branch company as well as
expatriate personnel who have work permit are entitled to get residence permit.
e Favorable visa terms for investors in industrial parks: Multiple entry visa valid for up to
five years is given for foreign investors; up to three years long visa for industrial park
service providers, managers, board members and senior experts employed by foreign
investors.
Registration and licensing processes
 To establish a new business (greenfield), start your application process at the
Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) which provides a streamlined one-stop service
for licensing and other processes related to establishment of a foreign investment.
 To buy an existing enterprise or shares (brownfield), start with seeking approval from
the Ministry of Trade.
Investors planning to develop an industrial park or make other forms of investment within industrial parks will have to go
through few additional steps.
Registration and licensing processes at EIC
Collect application form and relevant documents from EIC Information Desk  Industrial Park Developer
Application to EIC
Submit filled application to EIC Registration and Licensing Department.
Required documents: Approval by the Ethiopian Investment Board
a. Sole proprietorship: Valid passport; business or investment visa Sign an MoU with EIC
b. PLC: Draft memorandum and articles of association; valid passport and visa (if the shareholders
are individuals); notarized parent company documents induding certificate of incorporation, Registration and licensing at EIC
minutes of resolution passed by the parent company to invest in Ethiopia, memorandum and
articles of association and power of attorney (if the shareholders are companies)
. Opening a branch company: Authenticated parent company documents; general manager's
passport and visa for the new company
Additional steps only fora PLC
a. Check uniqueness of the company name at EIC
b. Edit and authenticate memorandum and articles of association at FIC
Collect a bank letter from EIC
Open a local bank account and transfer the minimum capital required
Collect bank transfer advice and submit it to EIC
Additional step only for a PLC Sign an MoU with EIC
a. Submit an authenticated office lease agreement and TIN certificate fo FIC
Deposit commitment fee of USD 200,000 in IP Developer's account: to be accounted as
Collect investment permit and commercial registration certificate from EIC part of initial capital on licensing
Note: All documents issued outside of Ethiopia need to be authenticated by the foreign public notary, Lo oe
Fthiopian Embassy, Ministry of foreign Affairs of Fthiopia and/or domestic public notary. Registration and licensing at EIC
Shed rental/sub-lease agreement with IP Developer
Handover by IP developer
Operating an investment
The Ethiopian Investment Commission and all other government agencies are at
your disposal to facilitate establishment and operation of your business.
Aftercare service: The good hands of the Ethiopian Investment Commission
will follow you as you lay the ground for your operation. EIC provides post-
establishment facilitation and follow-up services including, but not limited to:
 Facilitating acquisition of land and utilities (water, electrical power and
telecom services)
 Processing of loans and residence permit applications
e Approval of environmental impact assessment studies
Factors at a glance
Ethiopia offers a favorable business-operating environment. The following
provides an insight and a sense of the excellent available opportunities.
e Land is available for investment on lease-hold and rental basis
e The government reserves dedicated land for commercial farming of cotton,
horticulture etc
e Lease right is given for up to 80 years (depending on location and sector of
engagement)
e Industrial park enterprises have the option of sub-leasing developed land to
construct own production facility in industrial parks (they can also rent or
buy factory sheds)
Ethiopia has a growing educated labour force  over 50 Universities with
around half million student population; over 1,300 Technical and Vocational
Education and Training (TVET) Institutes with an annual intake close to one
million students
Globally competitive wage rates
Government-supported provision of skills trainings through industry
development institutes
Flexible domestic labour laws and regulations:
1.
3
4.
5
No minimum wage requirement on private sector employers
Normal working hours per day is 8 (excluding breaks for lunch)
Maximum number of working days per week is 6 (288 days per year)
No general restriction on night works
The number of paid annual leave days for a starting employee is 14;
slight increment for additional years of service.
Average premium pay for overtime work is 50%
Electricity
e Currently operational power generation of about 4,100 MW; additional power
generating plants with a capacity of 6,300 MW under construction
e The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam
~The largest hydroelectric power dam in Africa, being built on the Nile River
-Total installed capacity for the generation of additional 6,450 MW electricity
* Reliable electricity in industrial parks with government provision of dedicated power
substation for each park
e Electricity rate is estimated at USD 0.03/kWh  globally competitive rate
Water
e Water tariff rate ranges between a low of USD 0.076/m3 (if consumption is less than 7
m3) to USD 0.50/m3 (if consumption is greater than 501 m3)
The largest hydroelectric power
dam in Africa, being built on the
Nile River is expected to generate
additional 6,450MW electricity
Transport
Road
e High quality road infrastructure network connecting major cities, towns and
local markets in the country.
* Intemational highways connecting Ethiopia with neighboring countries and
regional markets.
Sea
 Reliable coastal and international marine and inland water transport services
from the Ethiopian Shipping and Logistics Services Enterprise (ESLSE) that
reaches to over 260 destination ports.
* Promotional rate for the manufacturing sector.
* Approximate distance from the center - 910 km to port of Djibouti (gate for a
lion's share of import/export), 964km to Port Barbara, 1881km to Port Sudan
and 2077km Port Mombasa.
Air
* A world-class and Star Alliance member national airline that flies to about 100
international passenger and 36 dedicated cargo destinations; also flies to over
20 domestic passenger destinations.
* Has promotional rate for export products.
* Addis Ababa Bole International Airport serves as a regional base for other
airlines such as KLM, Lufthansa, Emirates, Qatar and Turkish Airlines.
all
Q
pr
Rail
e Over 30 km Addis Ababa light rail - Fully operational, with capacity of 80,000
passengers/hr -1st of its kind in Sub-Saharan Africa.
* More than 750 km, Addis Ababa-Djibouti electric railway route completed - set
to significantly reduce the time and cost of inland transport for import/export
items.
* Several other railway lines under construction which connects all major
economic corridors in Ethiopia.
e Tax rates -
- 0-35% tax on income derived from employment
- 30% tax on taxable income from business- 3% withholding tax on goods
e There are close to 20 banks and insurance companies. imported for commercial use
oF gi
* The Development Bank of Ethiopia provides preferential loan for export oriented - 10% dividend tax on profits distributed to shareholders
investments. - 5% tax on royalty income So
- 5% tax on interest income from savings in local financial institutions
e Foreign investors can open a foreign account through approval from the National - 15% value added tax on imported items that are not exempted by law
Bank of Ethiopia. - 0-35% customs duty on imported items
- 0-100% excise tax on selected import items defined by law (items considered
luxurious, hazardous to health etc)
Foreign investors can access foreign loan. - 2-20% turnover tax on supply of goods or rendering of services
e Lease financing scheme is available.
* Investors benefit from income tax, customs duty and other tax exemptions as
* Investors need to obtain a tax payer identification number (TIN) from the Ethiopian investment incentives (see above on incentives for more)
Revenue and Customs Authority (ERCA) desk at EIC For more on factor costs, see http: /www. investethiopia. gov. et/images/Factor_Cost2015. pdf
* Tax rates - Personal income tax (0-35%), corporate income tax (30%), withholding
tax (2-3%), dividend tax (10%), royalty tax (5%), interest income tax (5%), VAT (15%),
customs duty (0-35%), excise tax imposed on selected items (0-100%), and turn over
tax (2-20%).
Legal and Institutional Framework
Ethiopia follows a civil law legal system where major laws are codified under
civil, commercial, penal and other codes. The Constitution is the supreme law
of the country. Under the Constitution are proclamations that are passed by the ey
Parliament, followed by regulations that are enacted by the Council of Ministers, 
and implementing directives passed by ministries or agencies. All proclamations
and regulations are published in official gazettes. Below are the most relevant
legislation as related to investment.
Investment laws:
e Investment Proclamation No. 769/2012, Amendment Proclamation No. 849/2014
* Investment Regulation No. 270/2012, Amendment Regulation No. 312/2014
* Investment Directives - Directive on Duty-free Import of Motor Vehicles No. 4/2005
EO
e Ethiopian Investment Board and the Ethiopian Investment Commission Establishment
Regulation No. 313/2014
Industrial park laws:
e Industrial Parks Proclamation No. 886/2015
e Industrial Parks Regulation, 2017
Commercial matters: = =
e Commercial Registration and Business Licensing Proclamation No. 980/2016.
e Trade Practices and Consumer Protection Proclamation No. 813/2013
e Commercial Code of Ethiopia, Proclamation No. 166/1960
e Civil Code of Ethiopia, Proclamation No. 165/1960
Tax laws:
e Income Tax Proclamation No. 979/2016
e Tax Administration Proclamation No. 983/2016
 Value Added tax Proclamation No. 285/2002, Amendment Proclamation No.
609/2008
e VAT Regulation No. 79/2002
e Excise Tax Proclamation No. 307/2002, Amendment Proclamation No.
610/2008
Labour law:
e Labour Proclamation No. 377/2003, Amendment Proclamation No.
494/2006
Customs law:
e Customs Proclamation No. 859/2014
e Export Trade Duty Incentive Schemes Proclamation No. 768/2012
e Ethiopian Customs Guide, Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority,
March 2017
Intellectual property:
Copyright and Neighboring Rights Protection Proclamation No. 410/2004,
Amendment Proclamation 872/2014.
Trademark Registration and Protection Proclamation No. 501/2006
Trademark Registration and Protection Regulation No. 273/2012
Inventions, Minor Inventions and Industrial Designs Proclamation No.
123/1995
Inventions, Minor Inventions and Industrial Designs Regulation No. 12/1997
Environmental laws:
Environmental Impact Assessment Proclamation No. 299/2002
Environmental Pollution Control Proclamation No. 300/2002
Foreign exchange laws:
Transparency in Foreign Currency Allocation and Foreign Exchange
Management Directive No. FXD/45/2016, Amendment Directive No.
FXD/46/2017
Several public institutions play proactive role in the promotion and facilitation of investment in Ethiopia. Below are the main institutions and an illustration of their role as
relevant to investment. See annex Il for contacts.
Ethiopian
Investment Board
- Chaired by the Prime Minister; members are composed of relevant Ministers
- Makes high-level decision on investment policy issues
- Supervises investment promotion and facilitation activities
Ethiopian Investment
Commission
Lead government agency responsible for investment promotion, registration and aftercare services:
- accountable to the Prime Minister
- engaged in targeted investment promotion
- provides streamlined one-stop service for investment registration and licensing, and post-investment aftercare facilitation
- approves investment incentives
- promotes, facilitates and regulates industrial parks
- initiates policy and implementation measures necessary for a conducive and competitive investment climate in collaboration with
relevant stakeholders
Industrial Parks
Development
- Develops public industrial parks
- Rents or sells pre-built factory sheds to industrial park enterprises
Corporation -Sub-leases developed land
- Operates, manages and maintains parks
- Provides commercial registration and licensing services (delegated to EIC as regards foreign direct investment)
Ministry of Trade - Registers brownfield investments (purchase of existing enterprise or shares) by foreign investors
- Registers and certifies commercial representatives
- Issues import/export release permit
Ministry of Industry
- Ensures the growth of industrial productivity through facilitation of technology transfer, skills development and extension services
- Establishes sector-specific industry development institutes which provide support in areas such as market facilitation, labour screening
and recruitment, knowledge and skills development etc. Currently operational institutes include:
- Ethiopian Textile Industry Development Institute
- Ethiopian Leather Industry Development Institute
(contd)
- Ethiopian Food, Beverages and Pharmaceutical Industry Development Institute
- Ethiopian Meat and Dairy Industry Development Institute
- Issues export trade duty incentive certificates
Ethiopian Revenue and
Customs Authority
- Collects revenue from customs duties and other taxes
- Administers tax incentives given to investors
- Provides customs clearance and facilitation service for import and export items; provides on-site customs clearance in
industrial parks
Ministry of Mines,
Petroleum and
Natural Gas
Provides one-stop services for investors in mining and petroleum operations:
- Issues investment license, export permit, customs duty and tax free support letter etc
Ministry of Labour and
Social Affairs
- Avails information on labour rules and regulations for investors
- Initiates and leads a tripartite engagement with employer and employee associations within and outside of industrial parks
- Assigns labour inspectors to follow up and supervise on implementation of labour laws by investors
Development Bank of
Ethiopia
A specialized financial institution established to promote the national development agenda through development finance and technical
support to viable investment projects in priority sectors such as agriculture, agro-processing and manufacturing
Provides medium and long-term loans for export-oriented investment projects in priority sectors
National Bank of
- Manages the country's foreign exchange reserve; ensures effective use of such reserve through monetary and financial regulations
- Issues approval of transactions involving foreign hard currency (investment capital inflow, repatriation of funds, suppliers credit, export/
import bank permit etc)
Ethiopian Electric Power
-Administers power plants in the country and buys power from independent power producers
I. CLIENT CHARTER OF EIC
NO
 00 NO UA Ww N=
20
21
TYPE OF SERVICE
Company name registration
Alteration/ amendment of a company name
Issuance of substitute certificate of a company name
Notarization of memorandum and articles of association
Amendment/ change of memorandum and articles of association
Issuance of commercial registration
Amendment/ change of commercial registration
Replacement or substitution of commercial registration
Cancellation of commercial registration
Issuance of investment permit
Investment permit (expansion)
Renewal of investment permit (new/expansion)
Change/amendment of investment permit
Issuance of substitute investment permit
Issuance of work permit
Renewal of work permit
Substitution of work permit
Registration and issuance of certificate for technology transfer agreement
Registration of a collaboration agreement concluded by a domestic investor with
export-oriented non-equity based foreign enterprise
Grading of construction contracting
Issuance of business license
DELIVERY TIME
1 hour
Thour
3 hours
5 working days
18 working days
2 working days
2 hours
3 working days
10 working days
FEE (ETB)
25
80
50
652
160
100
600
300
200/100
2000
1500
1200
200
5000
II. USEFUL CONTACTS
Ethiopian Investment Commission
P. O. Box 2313
Tel: +251-11-551 0033
Fax: +251-11-551 4396
E-mail: ethioinvest@investethiopia. gov. et
Website: http: //www. investethiopia. gov. et/
Corporation (IPDC)
Tel: +251-11-661 6986 / 661 6674
E-mail: info@ipdc. gov. et
Website: http: //www. ipdc. gov. et/index. php/en/
P. O. Box 6945
Tel: +251-11-550 7542
Fax: + 251-11-575 9871
Website: www. moin. gov. et
Ministry of Trade
P. O. Box 704
Tel: +251-11-551 8025
Fax: + 251-11-551 5411
Website: http: //www. mot. gov. et/home
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
P. O. Box 393
Tel: +251-11-551 7345
Fax: +251-11-551 4300/ 551 1244
E-mail: mfa. addis@telecom. net. et
Website: http: //www. mfa. gov. et/
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs
P. O. Box 2056
Tel: +251-11-551 7080
Fax: +251-11-551 8396
E-mail: molsa. comt@ethionet. et
Website: http: //www. molsa. gov. et/
Ethiopian Revenue and Customs Authority
Tel: +251-11-667 3970
Fax: + 251-11-662 9842
Website: http: //www. erca. gov. et/
National Bank of Ethiopia
P. O. Box 5550
Tel: +251-11-551 7430
Fax: +251-1-551 4588
E-mail: nbe. excd@ethionet. et
Website: http: //www. nbe. gov. et/
Development Bank of Ethiopia
P. O. Box 1900
Tel: 251-11-51 1188/89
Fax: 251-11-511606
E-mail: dbe@telecom. net. et
Website: http: /www. dbe. com. et/
Ethiopian Chamber of Commerce
and Sectoral Associations
P. O. Box 517
Tel: 251-11-551 8240
Fax: 251-11-551 7699
E-mail: etchamb@ethionet. et
Website: http: //www. ethiopianchamber. com/
Addis Ababa Chamber of Commerce
P. O. Box 2458
Tel: 251-11-551 8055
Fax: 251-11-551 1479
E-mail: info@addischamber. com
Website: http: //addischamber. com/
 E1C
ChATeLe AMa0terrt heli?
P. O. Box 2313  Addis Ababa e Ethiopia
Tel: +251 11 551 0033
Fax: +251 11 551 4396
Email: ethioinvest@investethiopia. gov. et
http: //www. investethiopia. gov. et/
August 2017. EIC. Ref. No. 03/2017