ed
NATPAL Safed AR 8INENLP STAN /
THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA A

PhPA Le ho Hin eo hon i} ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION LL a
# 020 ape RL p19 3/ 29
DATE REFN,
The World Bank
fthiopian Country Office
/ Addis Ababa
/ Attention to: Mr. Abiy Demissie
i Dear Sirs,
Subject: Submission of Audited Project Financial Statements for the Investment Project Financing
component of the Economic Opportunities Program (EOP) for the Year ending 7th July
2019 (2011 EFY)
Please find the attached Audited Project Financial Statements (PFSs) for the Economic Opportunities
Program (Investment Project Financing) for the year ending 7" July 2019.
Best Regards,
Plies AP In Se
$ NU 0 0)
3 Vays
BP) 
x 5 of
Foe 
oo
1
\
Cc:
e Ethiopian Investment Commission
es Set SS i Ea
ADDIS ABEBA ETHIOPIA TEL; (+251)11 551 0033 (+251) 11 553 7286 ETHIOINVEST@INVESTETHIOPIAN. GOV. ET
P.0. Box 2313 : FAX: (+251)11 551 43 96 - WWW. INVESTETHIOPIA GOV . ET
FTHIODTA
ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
ECOMOMIC OPPORTUNITIES PROGRAM (EOP)
INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING (IPF)
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR'S REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 07 JULY 2019
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES PROGRAM
[INDEPENDENT AUDITOR'S REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATION
IPF Investment Project Financing
EIC Ethiopian Investment Commission
ARRA Administration for Refugee and Returnee Affairs
IDA International Development Association
BOLSA Bureau of Labor and Social Affairs (regional)
EPP Employment Promotion and Protection
PES Public Employment Service
DFID U. K. Department for International Development
ETB Ethiopian Birr
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Pages
PART 1 INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background 3
1.2 Organizational objectives 3
1.3 Audit objectives 3
1.4 Audit scope 3
1.5 Audit methodology 4
1.6 Results of the audit 4
FART 2 STATEMENT OF MANAGEMENT'S RESPONSIBILITIES 5
PART 3 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
3.1 Independent auditors report 6-7
3.2 "Statement of Receipt and Expenditure
3.3 Statement of Financial Position 9
3.4 Summary of Activity in the Designated Account 10
3.5 Notes to the financial statements 11-12
PART 4 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON COMPLIANCE 13
FART 5 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL 14
ZCONCMIC OPPORTUNITIES PROGRAM
FOR THE YEAR ENED 07 JULY 2019
i.1
pa
w
a)
1.4
INTRODUCTION
Background
Investment Project Financing (IPF) is a 5 year project with a credit extension of USD 25.89 Million by
International Development Association - IDA (World Bank) to the Federal Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia with an objective of at enhancing the capacities of Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC),
Administration for Refugee and Returnee Affairs (ARRA) and regional Bureau of Labor and Social Affairs
(BOLSA) for proper execution of the Program for Results where capacity-building and institutional
strengthening measures will be financed through the IPF.
The annual budget will be prepare in line with the below three components of the IPF
Component 1: Program implementation support to the EIC (US$8 million)
Component 2: Operations Management capacity support to ARRA (US$3 million)
Component 3: Empioyment Promotion and Protection (EPP) for refugees and support to Public
Emiioyment Services (PESs) for Ethiopians (US$14 milion)
Organizational Objectives
The project aims at 2nhancing the capacities of EIC, Administration for Refugee and Returnee Affairs and
Regional Bureau of Labor and Social Affairs (BOLSA) for proper execution of the Program for Results
where capacity-building and institutional strengthening measures will be financed through the
Investment Project Financing.
Audit objectives
The objective of the audit is to express an opinion on the Project financial statements of EOP-IPF for the
year ended 07 July 2019. The audit includes but not limited to the following tasks:
Give comments and observations on the accounting records, systems and controls that were examined
during the course of audit;
Identify specific deficiencies or areas of weakness in systems and controls, and make recommendations
for their improvement; 
Report on the degree of compliance of each of the financial covenants in the financing agreement and
give comments, if any, on internal and external matters affecting such compliance
Determine whether the management and financial systems, including internal controls, within the
components are adequate for efficient and prudent management of funds;
Comment on the use of funds vis a vis approved budgets in relation to the agreement between the
organization and donors;
Assess the compliance with administrative/legal/fiscal issues regarding local employees contracted under
the organization; and
Recommend possible improvements and/or actions in any area on financial management and especially
areas where weaknesses were noted.
Audit scope
The audit scope required us to carry out sufficient audit steps and procedures to ensure that the audit
objectives were met for the year ended 07 July 2019. Details of the steps and procedures are described
in note 1.5.
TTHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
1.5
1.551
1.5.2
ii
Audit Methodology
We conducted the audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and in compliance with
the accounting policies and agreed terms between Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) and IDA
(International Development Association - World Bank).
Internal controls
We have evaluated significant internal controls to obtain sufficient understanding of the design of
relevant controls, policies and procedures and whether they have been in operation during the period
under review.
Compliance with terms agreement and applicable laws and regulations
We, have reviewed, assessed and reported on compliance with the terms and conditions of the
agreements.
Representations by grantees
_ We have obtained specific written representations from management.
Contractual obligations
Appraised relevant documents such as agreements with creditors;
Verified compliance of organization's expenditures with relevant terms of agreements as well as all the
applicable rules;
Verified compliance of the recipient with the terms and conditions of the agreement with the creditors;
and  
Verified timely submission of interim and audited financial reports for the creditor as stipulated in the
agreement.
Receipts and disbursements
Verified compliance with the disbursements and procurement procedures set up for the organization.
Implementation
Examined whether the expenditures are classified in accordance with the budget.
Reviewed bank statements and other relevant books of accounts and assessed whether they show a
complete view of the income received and expenditure incurred;
Verified and confirmed that all commitments are genuine, with the relevant agreements disclosed within
the financial records and are for the pursuance of agreed Project objectives; and
Examined a representative sample of payments transactions including accuracy and completeness of
records.
Other income sources
Established whether other income generated by the project, such as sales of items, exchange gains,
etc. ; have been used in furtherance of the project's objectives.
Results of the audit
Summary of results by audit objectives
Reach an opinion as to the validity of the financial statements.
In our opinion, the financial statements give a true and fair view of the sources and uses of funds in
accordance with the funding agreement and accounting policies stated in note 3.5.
Report on the financial management and internal control findings
We reviewed the internal control structure and concluded that the system was adequate to meet the
needs of the program. We have not observed reportable deficiency or material weaknesses on the
internal control of the project.
2
STATEMENT OF MANAGEMENTS' RESPONSIBILITIES
The Management of Economic Opportunities Pragram - Investment Project Financing is responsible for
the preparation of the financial statements for each financial year which gives a true and fair view of the
Project as at the end of the year and of the operating results for that year. The management of the
project Is required to keep proper accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy at any
time the financial position of the project. Management Is also responsible for safeguarding the assets
of the project.
The management is responsible for the preparation of financial statements that gives a true and fair
view In accordance with the funding agreement between Ethiopian Investment Commission and
International Development Association and the accounting policies stated In Note 3.5 of this report and
for such Internal controls as the management determines are necessary to enable the preparation of the
project financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
The management accepts responsibility for the financial statement which has been prepared using
appropriate accounting policies supported by reasonable and prudent judgments and estimates. The
management believes the project's financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the
financial affairs of the project for the year and of its financial position as at 07 July 2019. The
management further accepts responsibility for the maintenance of accounting records which may be
relled upon in the preparation of the project financial statements, as well as adequate systems of
Internal financial control.
The management certifies that, to the best of thelr knowledge, the Information furnished to the auditors
for the audit was correct and Is an accurate presentation of the project's financial transactions.
1) Designing, implementing and maintaining such Internal control as they determine necessary to
enable the presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether
due to fraud or error;
ll) Selecting suitable accounting policies and applying them consistently; and
Il) Making accounting estimates and judgements that are reasonable In the circumstances.
Management acknowledge that the independent audit of the financial statements does not relleve them of
thelr responsibilities.
Nothing has come to the attention of management to indicate that the Project will not remain a going
concern for at least the next twelve months from the date of this statement.
Signed on behalf of the management by:
Clo
Kedir Mussa
Program Director Financial Management Specialist
22 January 2020
HST General Partnership
Ethio-China Avenue; Wollo Sefer
HST Mina Building 5" Floor
P. O. Box 1608
Addis Ababa
Ethiopia
Chartered Certified Accountants and Authorized Auditors Tel: +251 115 527666/67
PAaANLATOD PLAN APEDTS CHLPSATD ABACT and
ETHIOPIAN INVESTEMENT COMMISSION
FOR THE YEAR EDNED 07 JULY 2019
3.1 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
Opinion
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of Economic Opportunities Program -
Investment Project Financing (IPF) financed by International Development Association (IDA) set out on
pages 8 to 12, which comprises the Statement of Financial Position as at 07 July 2019, Statement of
Receipts and Expenditure and the statement of Summary of Activity in the Designated Account for the
year ended 07 July 2019 and the related notes to the financial statements, including summary of
significant accounting policies.
In our opinion, the accompanying financial statements give a true and fair view of the cash receipts and
expenditure of the project for the year ended 7 July 2019 and the funds at 7 July 2019 and were
utilized for the purpose defined in the funding agreement and in accordance with the accounting policies
set out in note 3.5 to the financial statement and the financial reporting provisions of the donors.
Basis for opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISAs). Our
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the Audit
of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are independent of the Project in accordance with
the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements, and we have fulfilled
our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. We believe that the audit
evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Report on other requirements
In all materials respects, we confirm that:
i External funds have been used in accordance with the conditions of the relevant financing
agreements, with due attention to economy and efficiency, and only for the purposes for which the
financing was provided;
ii) Goods and services financed have been procured in accordance with the relevant financing
agreements and the financiers procurement policies and procedures;
ii All necessary supporting documents, records, and accounts have been kept in respect of all Project
ventures including expenditure reported using statements of expenditure (SOE) method of
disbursement;
iv) Designated Accounts have been maintained in accordance with the provisions of the relevant
financing agreements and disbursement letter and funds disbursed out of the Accounts were used
only for the purpose intended in the financing agreement;
v) The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the organizations accounting
policies and relevant World Bank guidelines;
vi) National laws and regulations have been complied with, and that the financial and accounting
procedures approved for the project; and
vii) There is verifiable ownership by Project or beneficiaries in line with the financing agreement in
respect of assets procured.
Audit = Tax + Consultin Learning Solution
Partners: Tekeste Gebru; Solomon Gizaw; Getu Jemaneh; Yonas Harun; Solomon Melaku
24
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT (Continued)
Management's responsibilities for the project financial statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements prepared
in accordance with the funding agreement between Ethiopian Investment Commission and International
Development Association and for such internal control as management determine is necessary to enable
the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud
or error. The management of the Project is also responsible for overseeing the Project's financial
reporting process.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the project financial statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free from
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditors report that includes our
opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit
conducted in accordance with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in aggregate,
they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken based on these
financial statements.
As part of an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs, we exercise professional judgement and maintain
professional skepticism throughout the audit. We also:
 Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit
evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not
detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error,
as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override
"of internal control.
 Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit to design audit procedures that
are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
Project's internal control.
s Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
estimates and related disclosures made by the management.
 Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the
disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events
in a manner that achieves fair presentation.
We communicate with management regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of
the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we
ideqtibe-ausiag our audit.
Registefed AiadieoP, SH
HST Gafiert Perris ip, Chartered Certified Accountants and Authorized Auditors
(Auditors ~OFETC-EOP- IPF)
ZTHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
3.2 STATEMENT OF RECIEPT AND EXPENDITURE
2019
ETB
RECIEPT Notes
Fund receipts during the year 3.6 24,004,707
Other income 3.7 1,339,467
25,344,174
EXPENDITURE
Total expenditure during the year 3.8 (4,912,479)
Excess of receipt over expenditure 20,431,696
Fund balance at 8 July 2018 -
Fund balance at 7 July 2019 20,431,696
3.3 STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
AS AT JULY 7 2019
Notes ETB
ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and bank balances 3.9 20,687,266
20,687,266
PEs
FUND BALANCE AND LIABILITIES
Fund balance 20,431,696
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Payables 3.10 255,570
Total Liabilities 20,687,266
The financial statements on pages 8 to 12 were approved by the Economic Opportunities
Program-Investment Project Financing management on 22 January 2020 and signed on Its behalf
by:
NS
Bet: say Kedir Mussa
Program Director Financlal Management Specialist
A .
ECOMOMIC OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM (EOP)
SUMMARY OF THE ACTIVITY IN THE DESIGNATED ACCOUNT
USD Bank Account (a/c#0102011300002): National Bank of Ethiopia
Opening Bank Balance
ADD: Receipts
Fund received from IDA
Gain on exchange rate difference
Funds available for use
Less: Transfers and Expenditures/payments
Expenditures/payments
Closing Balance
2019 2019
usD ETB
3.5.1 880,590 24,004,707
35:4 = 1,339,467
880,590 25,344,174
3.53 200,000 4,912,479
680,590 20,431,696
mT
pra P artne Sy,
ZB SAX
LO TCI
ta)
0. OUntants *
10
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
3.5
3.5.1
3.5.2
3.54
3.5.5
3.5.6
BASIS OF PREPARATION
The financial statements have been prepared on modified cash basis of accounting whereby receipts are
recognized when cash is received and expenditures are recognized when incurred.
Budget
The budget is developed on the same accounting basis (modified cash basis), same classification basis, and
for the same period as for the financial statements. The budget was approved as required by the standard
conditions of the credit agreement and work-plan .
Funds Receipt
Fund receipt is recognized to the extent of credit extended by the Bank to the project's designated account.
Funds received and direct payments during the year are as follows:
Received (USD) Confirmed
(USD)
Cash transfer 880,590 880,590
880,590 880,590
Expenditure
Expenditure represents amounts disbursed and costs incurred denominated in ETB.
Foreign currency transactions
Cash receipts and payments arising from transactions in a foreign currency are recoded in the financial
statements using the actual rate of exchange applicable on date of transactions. Foreign currency
denominated monetary assets and liabilities are translated to ETB using exchange rates applicable at year-
end.
Non-current assets
In accordance with lender's requirements, purchase of fixed assets is expensed on acquisition. EIC maintains
an asset register that tracks all project fixed assets.
Functional and presentation currency
Items included in the financial statements are measured using the currency of the primary economic
environment in which the entity operates (the functional currency). The financial statements are presented
in Ethiopian Birr ("ETB") which is the Project's functional currency.
. Transactions and balances
Cash receipts and payments arising from transactions in a foreign currency are recorded in the financial
statements using the actual rate of exchange. Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional
currency of the Project using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions. Foreign exchange
gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at year-end
exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognized in
statements of receipts and payments.
Comparative information
As this is the first set of financial statements of the project, it does not include comparative financial
information.
11
ECOMQOMIC OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM (EOP)
3.6
3.8
3.10
INCOME
Deposits
OTHER INCOME
Gain on Foreign exchange fluctuation
OPERATING EXPENSES
Computer and Accessories
Furniture and Fixture
Salary and other benefits
Stationery and Office Supplies
Bank Service charge
Other Operation Expenses
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENT
Cash at bank
Cash on hand
TRADE AND OTHER PAYBLES
Salary/ Wages payable
Employment Tax Payable
Pension Payable
VAT Payable
Withholding Tax Payable
__ 24,004,707
24,004,707
1,339,467
1,084,280
43,939
3,548,115
28,979
7,674
199,491
4,912,479
20,686,824
442
3,953
115,000
126,000
9,369
1,249
255570
12
H T Mina Building 5% Floor
PAaOheATO: PLAN APELLTG PHLbeATD h4ACT Brie BAL ay
Ethiopian Investment Commission
Economic Opportunities Program
Investment Project Financing (IPF)
Attention: Betseit Sisay
Program Director
Dear Madam,
5 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of EOP-IPF financed by IDA set out on pages 8 to 12,
which includes the Statement of Financial Position as at 07 July 2019, Statement of Receipts and Expenditure
and the Statement of Summary of Activity in the Designated Account for the year ended 07 July 2019 and the
related notes to the financial statements, including summary of significant accounting policies.
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing. In planning and performing our
audit, we considered the Project's internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing our auditing
procedures for expressing our opinion on the financial statements, but not for expressing an opinion on the
effectiveness of the entity's internal control. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the effectiveness of
the entity's internal control.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the preceding paragraph and was
not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be significant deficiencies or material
weaknesses and therefore, there can be no assurance that all deficiencies, significant deficiencies, or material
weaknesses have been identified.
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operaticn of a control does not allow management or
employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct
misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in
internal control, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the Project's financial
statements will not be prevented, or detected and corrected on a timely basis.
Based on our audit, we did not identify any deficiencies to report on.
This reper Asda e information of EIC and IDA.
i TEES
t Sarthe oth audit resulting in this independent auditor's report is Solomon Melaku.
The e ager ent
nM etal, ry
Audit AN d Certif! 5
Authoring
Registered Auditor
HST General Partnership,
Chartered Certified Accountants and Authorized Auditors
(Auditors of EOP - IPF)
Audit  Tax * Consulting  Learning So