A Diagnostics
Study on ESG
In Sustainable

Investments
5
for Garment & Textile, 
Leather & Leather Products,
Horticulture, Agro-Processing
and Sugar-Related Industries.
\
Diagnostics Study on ESG Sustainable Investments
for Garment and Textile, Leather and Leather Products,
Horticulture, and Agro-Processing and Sugar-Related Industries
24.11.2020
Diagnostics Study on ESG Sustainable Investments for Garment and Textile, Leather and
Leather Products, Horticulture, and Agro-Processing and Sugar-Related Industries
Document prepared by:
Sofies Sustainability Leaders Pvt Ltd.
(Sofies)
The China Africa Advisory (CAA)
List of authors:
Sofies
Ankit Kapasi
Shramana Dey
Rohan Ranganath
Pratulya Sivashankar
Kishore Ganesan
CAA
Alexander Demissie
Moritz Weigel
Project Manager
Ankit Kapasi, Sofies (ankit. kapasi@sofiesgroup. com)
Table of contents
Executive Summary 6
1 Background 14
1.1 ESG and its benefits 14
1.2 The Belt and Road Initiative-Sustainable Investment Platform program 16
2 Sustainable Investments in Ethiopian Industries 17
2.1 Ethiopia's sustainability commitment 17
2.2 Investment-driven development 19
2.3 Ethiopian industrial sectors 20
3 International ESG Frameworks 22
3.1 Key features of ESG frameworks 23
3.2 Limitations of ESG frameworks 27
4 Designing an ESG framework for selected Ethiopian industries 28
4.1 Objectives of the ESG framework 28
4.2 Designing and developing the ESG Framework 28
4.3 ESG policy gaps and relevant institutions 39
5 Case Studies 42
5.1. Objective 42
5.2. Methodology 42
5.3. Case study companies 42
5.4. Results 45
5.5. Observations 67
5.6. Refinement of the ESG Framework 69
6 Recommendations on operationalizing the framework 73
6.1 Next steps 74
List of Figures
Figure 1: Key tenets of the BRI... iit eases serene eee eee ennns 16
Figure 2: Reforms outlined in the ten year perspective plan ........... ccciiiiiin cere 18
Figure 3: PRI Signatories Growth... 22
Figure 4: International frameworks and reports reviewed for this study .... ..23
Figure 5: Outline of the ESG Framework for Ethiopia ....... ccccoccviniiiiinneen. ..29
Figure 6: The key considerations for the ESG Framework for Ethiopia..... 31
Figure 7: A staggered approach t0 ESGi...... ooo iii eer sees sree eae ennne 33
Figure 8: Performance standards (indicators and sub-indicators) considered under the ESG
FTAMEBWOTK cca e sear eases ease sense esas eee em nee s ene e eens ees enn eee enee ener eee erneas
Figure 9: Methodology for the assessment system ... .
Figure 10: Proposed iNStIUtioNal SEL-UP ........ cooiiiiiiiiie cece eee eases
Figure 11: Overview of case study companies by name, location, industrial sector and ownership .... 43
Figure 12: Sustainability policies applied by SECLON ........ euiiiieeee ee eee es
Figure 13: Sustainability standards applied by interviewed companies .
Figure 14: % share of companies employing dedicated ESG experts.......... coov irreverence,
Figure 15: % of companies providing ESG training to employees. ......... ccccvvee iriver
Figure 16: Type of supplier selection Process ....... cccvviviereericeeen seers
Figure 17: Type of anti-corruption practice applied by interviewed companies............. ccc.. c....
Figure 18: Labor policies and standards applied by interviewed companies.......... ccccccevuueeen.
Figure 19: Type of welfare facilities provided by interviewed companies ........ c.. cccccvveiiinneenn.
Figure 20: Minimum wage payment from selected companies. ........ ccocveeereniecveeeen cece. .
Figure 21: % of workforce hired permanently by interviewed COmpanies............ cccvevrreee vee eveee eee.
Figure 22: type of benefits provided by companies interviewed ......... cccoooooiiiiiiiiin cies
Figure 23: Number of companies having a secure and discrete mechanism for grievance ... -
Figure 24: Companies OHS MEASUIES ......... oiiii iii eee eerste aera ease sese ees sree e saree eee snnnes
Figure 25: Number of companies with Quality Control in place and frequency of quality control of
[1 (070 0x <TR P TP PPPPTPN
Figure 26: Number of companies with CSR activity ....... cccccceeeeeee.
Figure 27: % of companies taking actions on energy efficiency
Figure 28: % of companies taking actions on the reduction of water usage........ cccceccevrvr irene. 65
Figure 29: Local procurement of supplies by industry .
Figure 30: Key aspects of framework operationalization ............. coooeiririiiie ieee eee 74
Figure 31: A simple matrix approach to stakeholder MappiNg......... ccceevieiiiireerineeeee eee eee es 77
List of Tables
Table 1: Frequency of indicator categories across ESG frameworks... eccceeeneeceeeen, 25
Table 2: Summary of ESG Framework policy gaps by section and sub-indicator .. ...39
Table 3: Case study companies in the garment and textile industry ............. ..43
Table 4: Case study companies in the leather and leather product industry. ....44
Table 5: Case study companies in the horticulture iNAUSETY .......... eoiiiiiii een 44
Table 6: Case study companies in the agro-processing industry, including the sugar and sugar-related
[100 [UE {YUP PUPP 45
Table 7: Overview of results of the ESG Framework assessment of case study companies by
categories and INAUSTHAl SECIOTS ..... cuiiii iii eerste ease e seers sees ae enn ne eens
Table 8: Results of the ESG Framework assessment of case study companies on governance
Table 9: Results of the ESG Framework assessment of case study companies on social sustainability
ee eee eset eafeeEfeeseeeseeeaeeeseesstteesesseseeetenseesatesseessesseisssteseessteseetesessatensesiateeseeaateetetansetartaasee antennae ate nren are srenan 54
Table 10: Results of the ESG Framework assessment of case study companies on environmental
F103 P= LaF ToT 111 PF PUU RRP 64
Table 11: Indicator mapping based on ease of obtaining reSPONSES ........ coeeiivieeieriiiieen eerie 70
Executive Summary
Ethiopia, the second most populous country in Africa, with a population of over 100 million
people is the fastest growing economy in the East African region with a rapidly growing
industrial landscape and a huge potential of growth in the years to come.
Over the last few years, the countrys rapid economic growth has seen a slow-down largely
owing to the changing political landscape, further exacerbated in the face of the COVID-19
pandemic and the resultant global economic slump. Consequently, there is a need for building
resilience in a number of key sectors in the country.
In this context, the principles of ESG (Environment, Social, and Governance) integrated into
industrial operations, can provide a holistic and novel way of conducting business, one that is
profitable not only for the companies, but for the country as a whole. ESG principles have
demonstrated their effectiveness globally, in direct and measurable means (such as greater
transparency, reduced impact on the environment, etc. ), and also through indirect results
(greater stability and resilience, better performance in volatile market conditions, etc. ). Many
countries, including several emerging economies are demonstrating a paradigm shift through
a growing commitment towards sustainable financing i. e. a strong focus towards ESG-themed
investment. ESG has been recognized as a strategy for accomplishing this transformation.
ESG principles are also well-aligned to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
can significantly contribute to the achievement of the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs).
In Ethiopia, the support, advisory, and networking opportunities provided by the Belt and Road
Initiative  Sustainable Investment Promotion (BRI-SIP) have created an enabling environment
for sustainable investment practices. Garment and textile, horticulture, leather and leather
products, agro-processing, including sugar-related industries, are some of the key export-
oriented light manufacturing industries in Ethiopia. These industries are of great importance
for both domestic and foreign investors, including the countries along the Belt and Road.
This study presents the results of an exercise dedicated to formulating an ESG framework for
the aforementioned industry sectors in Ethiopia, based on both global experience and good
practices as well as local experiences sustainability in with.
The study analyzed a wide range of international ESG frameworks, concluding that there are
certain key features common to the most widely used international frameworks: mission
statement and context; ESG integration process; Key Performance Indicators (KPIs); and
operationalization of the framework. The key purpose of this assignment was to adopt lessons
from such existing international frameworks to Ethiopia, particularly for the four selected
industry sectors.
The study also highlights that ESG frameworks are not always comprehensive and have their
limitations. A number of KPIs, especially in the Governance and Social categories are not
easily quantifiable and are therefore harder to report and evaluate. Any KPI that relies on self-
reporting could be subject to corporate bias and credibility issues which could give a skewed
representation of the performance of the entity in question. Frameworks that have been
created for adoption by the global business community could face roadblocks in
implementation in different geographical locations due to variations in regulations, business
and political climate and various other external factors.
Bearing in mind these limitations. the ESG framework for selected Ethiopian industry sectors
developed under this project has been designed to be simple and intuitive in its macroscopic
elements, while also remaining deep enough in its ability to measure challenges and progress.
The framework has four key components:
Foundational elements: underlying considerations and qualities of the framework that
provide a sound basis for the rest of the features. This includes the key considerations
that the framework is built around, the design of the framework which proposes a three
phase approach to framework implementation, and the replicability of the framework.
Performance standards: measurable indicators under E, S and G that can be
quantified, compared, and assessed.
Assessment system: the mechanism by which the indicators are quantified and its
inherent variables (such as weightages). The proposed assessment system assigns a
uniform scoring at a question level, which is averaged out and expressed as a
percentage score for the sub-indicator. At the sub-indicator level, a weightage
corresponding to priority (between 1- low priority and 3-high priority) is assigned. The
score of the sub-indicator is the product of the percentage score and the weightage.
This sub-indicator score is then aggregated to the indicator and category levels.
Implementation framework: suggestions on how the framework can be
operationalized, and the key interventions needed to support the same. This section
provides insight on the institutional setup and implementation and monitoring protocol
that needs to be established, in order to effectively deploy the framework.
These components have been summarized in the figure below:
Governance
ESG Framework
for Ethiopia
Environmental
Elements of the framework
5 %
Foundational Performance Implementation
ig > SESE SEE >
Key considerations Category (E, S, G) Category total Institutional set-up
Staggered approach Indicator Indicator total Monitoring protocol
)  Subd ]
A oo ub-indicator s
Replicability | Sub-indicator weightage E
+   5
~, BR
KX Specific questions Answer score Kd
of
,
o, *
a, R34
, o*
o
e
wy o
, 
RRLTTN PPtLide
RLLTEEPTTTY TELA
This framework has been contextualized through detailed case studies, where 18 companies
were selected and then assessed based on the developed draft framework.
The objective of the deep-dive consultations with these companies across the four industrial
focus sectors has been twofold:
1. To understand where companies stand in terms of sustainability of their operations and
what challenges they face and the sustainability scenario of the sector/industry and the
government policy frameworks pertaining to the sector.
2. To test the draft ESG Framework developed for Ethiopia as described in Chapter 4
against the reality of companies on the ground and to refine the draft by reflecting those
local realities in the final ESG Framework.
The criteria for the selection of case study companies included a balance between: the four
industrial focus sectors, the geographic regions within the country; companies located within
industrial parks and outside industrial parks; companies owned by foreign and local investors;
and larger and smaller companies in terms of revenue and number of employees.
The 18 case study companies included four companies from the textile and garment industry,
five from the leather and leather product industry, four from the horticulture industry, four from
the agro-processing industry, and one from the sugar and sugar-related industry.
=
On the application of the frameworks assessment system to the case studies, the following
results have been obtained:
Sector-wise score (in %)
[as
Garment & Textile [NNNEGGG 75%
EE 43%
EE 4%
Leather & Leather Products [| NNRNRRDRN-EBRDEEEEE 5:
EE 21%
IE
Hortcuure I 5:
 27
I 55
Agro-processing, incuding suger EE 7:
TT ag%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
um Governance score m Social score mEnvironmental score
Based on the results of the assessment and the experience of conducting the case studies,
the following observations have been made:
 Thanks to strong labor policies, there is a better understanding of social concerns in
comparison to governance or environmental concerns.
+ In allfour sectors surveyed, the businesses interviewed demonstrated some level of efforts
towards sustainability
 Understanding of sustainability is limited, especially in domestic companies, when
compared to foreign companies.
 There are many examples of innovation and investment in sustainability, but they are not
curated as they were evolved organically to either fulfil a need or through altruistic
endeavors
 There is a general sense of reluctance towards public disclosures/transparency
 The Agro-processing sector (including sugar and sugar-related industries) emerged as the
best performer in all three categories (G, S, E), while the Leather & Leather Products sector
has been seen lagging across the categories.
Other, category-specific results include:
 50% of the responding companies have established dedicated departments or have hired
dedicated personnel overseeing ESG aspects.
 Almost all companies interviewed have some sort of ESG policy in place.
 Companies with strong foreign shareholder or government involvement have formal EMS
in place. Most of the interviewed companies have sector specific standards in place.
 Companies highlighted that having ESG in place will help them in their international market
expansion.
 Full compliance with Ethiopian labor laws, transparency in companys management style
as well as working closely with trade unions have been highlighted as important aspect to
avoid corruption and increase transparency.
 Most companies undertake regular audits in the financial, social, environmental, water or
energy areas.
10
Anti-Corruption/Anti-bribery Policy
Does your company have any of the following policies?
Equal Opportunities Policy
Health and Safety Policy
Environmental Policy
Social Responsibility Policy
Sustainability Policy
[=
N
~
[+]
JN
12 14 16 18
mAgro-Processing m Garment & Textile mHorticulture m Leather & Leather Products m Sugar Sector
Social
All 18 companies interviewed strictly follow the countrys labor standards, by, for example,
providing written contracts to their employees, allowing for collective bargaining and paying
overtime.
11 companies interviewed pay their employees equal to, or more than, the local average
salary for their respective roles in the company.
Companies have indicated that they provide adequate Personal Protective Equipment
(PPE) to their employees.
14 companies have a nominated health and safety representative and/or expert in place
16 companies have an active Corporate Social Responsibility program, including dedicated
local improvement projects in their respective communities.
Environment
Overall, 50% of the case study companies have taken one or multiple actions in the last three
years to increase energy efficiency. 58% of companies have increased the recycling of polluted
water for reuse in their operations.
All case study companies have waste management systems in place, but in some
industries up to 50% of raw materials goes to waste.
On average case study companies procure about 29% of their supplies locally. This varies
significantly between industries with the leather and leather product industry having with
71% the highest average of local procurement and horticulture with only 11% the lowest.
Only one of the case study companies is conducting periodic calculations of its carbon
footprint.
None of the case study companies considered their operations as having any adverse
impact on local biodiversity.
11
% of case study companies that have taken action on
energy efficiency by activity
Replacement of old machines 38
Use of energy recovery processes 38
Use of energy efficient controls
The experience from the field shows a motivated, if inconsistent policy and practice landscape,
with encouraging examples of innovation and good practices. Building on the observations,
the following overarching recommendations have been noted:
 There is potential to adapt the framework to the needs of context. This not only
includes any sector-to-sector adaptation, but also the development of a lite framework to
match expectations from the ground. While simplification of the framework is not
recommended as a permanent measure, it is important to remember that the current
understanding of ESG and sustainability in general is largely limited, and thus some
indicators and sub-indicators are unlikely to see meaningful responses in near future.
+ Implementation of the framework requires action across various key aspects. The
project consortium has identified seven key areas where action needs to be mobilized, in
order to successfully execute the framework. Aspects such as institutional setup,
implementation and monitoring had been built into the fabric of the framework while
capacity building, legislative support and technology development came out as important
considerations from the case studies. Financing mechanisms, stakeholder engagement
are other areas of interest, based on the knowledge and expertise of the consortium.
+ Many decisions relating to the framework still need to be taken. This project provides
a bird's-eye view towards designing a mechanism for ensuring ESG-oriented investments.
In this context, the framework acts as a potential bridge between global examples and
ground reality. The process of implementation, however, requires an even deeper analysis,
that is conducted in consultation with a diverse group of stakeholders. In this context, the
framework in its current form is the necessary foundation, onto which the actual rules of
engagement for sustainable investments need to be built. This includes discussions on
12
roles and responsibilities of key players, necessary capacity development for all relevant
stakeholders, terms of reference for different parties involved, development and approval
of necessary elements (financing mechanism, policy/legislation, institutional setup), and
the roadmap for implementation.
 The scope of this study was fairly limited. A robust pilot phase (voluntary compliance)
is necessary to not only adequately calibrate the framework, but to also set Ethiopia-
specific benchmarks for the performance standards. While building the ecosystem for
ESG-informed investments is likely to take a few years, the first step in the implementation
of the framework should be a pilot study covering a realistic period of 2-3 years.
Participation in the pilot needs to be a representative sample for each of the sectors
considered.
LEGISLATIVE
SUPPORT
CAPACITY
BUILDING INSTITUTIONAL
SETUP
IMPLEMENTATION &
MONITORING TECHNOLOGY
DEVELOPMENT
FINANCING STAKEHOLDER
ENGAGEMENT
These recommendations have been developed into concrete steps that can be implemented
over the next few years, presented in chapter 6 of this report.
13
1 Background
Ethiopia is the second most populous country in Africa, with a population of 109 million people
(2018). It is the fastest growing economy in the East African region, driven by the nations
strong commitment to the development of the industrial sector in the past decade. Ethiopia
aims to become lower-middle-income country by 2025. " Without doubt, Ethiopias economic
landscape is dynamic and rapidly growing, with vast potential for further progress in the coming
years. However, in the last 3-4 years, this rapid expansion has lost pace due to factors such
as a changing political scenario, causing a desynchronization between federal and regional
economic objectives and policies. Ethiopia's GDP growth rate has witnessed a downward
trend going from 10.39% in 2015 to a significant low of 6.82% in 2018 which marginally
improved to 8.28% in 2019. This problem has been exacerbated by the current COVID-19
pandemic situation that has severely affected economies all around the world.
Since the first case of COVID-19 was registered in Ethiopia in the middle of March 2020, there
have been wide ranging detrimental effects of the pandemic on Ethiopia's economy. Modelling
work by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) predicts that the GDP
growth might be reduced by 1.2 - 4.5% with a rebound in 2021 set to see a modest 6% growth
rate. On the industrial level, a 25-30% contraction in exports of goods is predicted. * However,
at the end of July 2020, the Ethiopian government announced that job losses have not been
as severe as initially expected, with 330,000 jobs lost thus far.
Companies all over the world have been struggling to cope with all the negative externalities
that the pandemic has brought with it, aside from the obvious health concerns. Along with the
crippling loss of revenue, companies are also experiencing breakdowns in corporate structure,
uncertainty in decision making and serious loss of human capital. However, there is evidence
that certain companies that have enshrined the principles of ESG in their workflow seem to be
coping with this shock much better than those that have not.
1.1 ESG and its benefits
ESG refers to the Environmental, Social and Governance considerations by corporate entities
to ensure that they minimize the negative impact of their activities on the environment and the
communities they operate in as well as the society as a whole. These principles also ensure
that companies are able to grow in a sustainable manner and develop resilience to acute
shocks such as COVID-19 or any other national or international emergencies that would
otherwise make them extremely vulnerable. Investors consider ESG principles and metrics to
ensure that their investments are sustainable. Examples of such parameters are labor
protection and welfare, pollution control, transparent accounting, stakeholder engagement etc.
There are multiple international frameworks which aid in the operationalization of ESG
1 https: /fiwww . worldbank. org/en/country/ethiopia/overview##1
2
https: //datacommons. org/fools/timeline#&place=country/ETH&statsVar=GrowthRate Amount EconomicActivity GrossDomestic
Production
3 https: //www. macrotrends. net/countries/ETH/ethiopia/gdp-growth-rate
4 Socio-economic impact of COVID-19 on Ethiopia, ONE UN Assessment, May 2020
5 https: //ethiopianmonitor. com/2020/07/27/job-loss-due-to-covid-19-crisis-not-as-high-as-initially-thought/
14
principles in various sectors of the economy. These frameworks are explained further in
Chapter 3 of this report.
ESG integration has multifold benefits for businesses. Those who have invested in human
capital management have managed to achieve better financial performance and resilience in
contrast to those who have not. * Companies that adopted good governing practices seem to
be ahead of the curve and have been able to soften the blow of the pandemic. Companies with
agile and well-planned supply chains and business structures have circumnavigated the
widespread disruptions caused in supply chains due to transport restrictions. For instance,
while other airline companies in Africa were struggling to cope with the pandemic and its
challenges, Ethiopian Airlines managed to soften the negative impact and recoup a large part
of its pre-COVID revenue through quick decision making and diversification into cargo
transportation.
From these, and many such examples, it is evident that companies which have adopted ESG
strategies have been able to better cope with the various predicaments brought about by the
pandemic. Moreover, in a recent Ernst and Young study, 76% of the respondents have claimed
that ESG principles must be integrated into stimulus packages designed to help economies
recover from the pandemic. Investors and financial institutions are considering this period to
be a significant opportunity to increase focus on ESG.
Resilience to such acute shocks is not the only advantage of the use of ESG principles. By
following recommended practices in the three areas of environment, social and governance,
companies have seen marked improvements in climate resilience, community engagement,
working conditions and labor benefits and top-level decision making, among others. These
overall improvements have also led to tangible financial benefits. In a global survey of 475
financial institutions conducted in 2017, 68% of the respondents said that adoption of ESG
strategies has led to a significant improvement in returns. Consequently, ESG principles are
now also being considered by many investors while making their portfolio decisions. In the
same survey it was found that 40% of the investors in Europe and 38% of the investors in USA,
have 25-49% of their investments with ESG allocations. NASDAQ recently completed a
review of the companies featured in the 2019 ESG Rankings by MSCI. It has been observed
that those ranked A and above exhibited 6.4% less risk when compared to the lower ranked
companies that displayed 10.2% greater risk. It is clear from these numbers that the leaders
in the MSCI rankings have achieved higher returns and experienced lower volatility. The
leaders have also proven to be less susceptible to negative outlier events such as COVID-
19.10
Based on the above presented data, it is clear that ESG strategies are now becoming more
and more normal and economically beneficial. Companies, investors, legislators and
5 https: //www theasset. com/article-esa/41117/covid-19-highlights-advantages-of-esg-integration
7 https: /theexchange africa/aviation/lessons-from-ethiopian-airlines-success-despite-pandemic/
8 https: //www. ey. com/en_glffinancial-services-emeia/three-ways-esg-factors-can-make-portfolios-more-resilient-post-covid-19
9 https: //www. businesswire. com/news/home/20170419006214/en/Asset-Owners-Integration-ESG-Significantly-Improved-
Returns
10 https: /fwww. forbes. com/sites/betsyatkins/2020/06/08/demystifying-esgits-history--current-status/#538445c2cdd
15
international funding organizations are increasingly incorporating ESG principles in all areas
of work. This trend showcases a shift in the mindset of stakeholders and corporations on a
global scale and it is seen as a right thing to do for business and society. The future of business
lies in sustainability and it is important not to be left behind in this regard. At the forefront of
sustainable business and investment, are the ideals and principles laid out in the various ESG
frameworks that have been published in the past few years.
1.2 The Belt and Road Initiative-Sustainable Investment Promotion program
Recognising the importance and relevance of ESG principles, along with the immense
potential for growth and sustainable development that they bring along, Ethiopia has launched
the Sustainable Investment Promotion (SIP) program, under the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI).
The BRI-SIP program is supported by the UN Peace and Development Trust Fund (UNPDF),
in partnership with the Ethiopian Investment Commission, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
China, the Chinese Embassy in Ethiopia, Ethiopia-China Chamber of Commerce and
enterprises.
a BRI fea
Figure 1: Key tenets of the BRI
The advantage of the BRI-SIP program is that it enables to leverage investment opportunities
which can lead to development of human resources, institutional capacity building and the
unlocking of Ethiopias vast potential as a nation, all while ensuring that the development is
occurring in a sustainable manner, specifically in alignment with the SDGs. '" Under the BRI-
SIP program, this report provides an ESG Framework for Ethiopias garment and textile,
horticulture, leather and leather products and agro-processing, including sugar-related
industries as well as first-hand insights from in-depth consultations with 18 case study
companies in Ethiopia on the development and implementation of such a framework.
1 https: //www. cn. undp . org/content/china/en/home/ourperspective/ourperspectivearticles/2019/sustainable-investment-in-belt-
and-road-partner-countries. html
16
2 Sustainable Investments in Ethiopian Industries
In the last two decades Ethiopia has pursued a number of growth and development-based
programs, with specific focus on pro-poor sustainability-linked policies. This commitment to
sustainability is not new in Ethiopia; indeed, the Constitution itself provides for a right to
sustainable development and a right to a clean and healthy environment. The country has
implemented various plans and programs fostering sustainable development since the 1990s"
and adopted its national Climate-Resilient Green Economy Strategy in 2011. " This dedication
to socio-economic development and environmental protection was further crystallized through
the integration of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its SDGs in national
policies and programs.
2.1 Ethiopias sustainability commitment
The intention of delivering on the right to sustainable development has a long history. The
State launched the Environmental Policy of Ethiopia (the EPE) in 1997 to broadly outline the
policy framework for new environmental law and practice. The EPEs overall policy goal is to
improve and enhance the health and quality of life of all Ethiopians and to promote sustainable
social and economic development through the sound management and use of natural, human-
made and cultural resources and the environment as a whole so as to meet the needs of the
present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs. Ethiopia also adopted the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Proclamation in
2002, recognizing the value of ElAs in harmonizing and integrating environmental, economic,
cultural and social considerations into a decision-making process in a manner that promotes
sustainable development.
In line with its overall and specific policy objectives, the EPE provides a set of Key Guiding
Principles, including every person's right to live in a healthy environment; the principles of
sustainable development and public participation; the principles of integration, prevention,
precaution, equity, conservation, EIA, and polluter pays principle. Ethiopia is also a signatory
to international environmental agreements derived from the 1992 Earth Summit, i. e. the Rio
Conventions on Biodiversity, Desertification and Climate change. These agreements have
helped guide the national legislation towards sustainable development.
Much like the linkage between the MDGs and GTP |, Ethiopia has integrated the SDGs with in
its Second Five Year Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP Il), spanning the period 2015/16-
2019/20 thus taking a national ownership of its development obligation. The GTP Il is an
12 https: /iwww. greengrowthknowledge. org/sites/default/files/downloads/policy-
database/ETHIOPIA%29%20Growth%20and%20Transformation%20Plan %2011%2C%20V0l%20!. %20%20%282015%2C16-
2019%2C20%29. pdf
13 Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, Article 43 (1).
https: //www. un . org/ldcportal/comprehensive-programmes-of-action-for-ldcs/
15 https: //www. un. org/ldcportal/comprehensive-programmes-of-action-for-ldcs/
18 https: //brill. com/view/journals/ajls/aop/article-10.1163-17087384-12340063/article-10.1163-17087384-
12340063. xml? language=en
17 https: /iwww. greengrowthknowledge. ora/sites/default/files/downloads/policy-
2019%2C20%29. pdf
17
integrated multi-stakeholder, medium-term national development plan tasked with the effective
coordination and implementation of the SDGs. The SDGs' were integrated with ten of the
priority areas of the GTP Il with their targets being merged with GTP II's targets in macro-
economy, economic development, infrastructure development, social development,
democratic systems development and cross-cutting-sectors development.
Ethiopias recently adopted Homegrown Economic Reform Agenda (HGER) has the main goal
to overcome structural challenges of the economy and it is an essential element of the
Governments long-term vision providing an enabling environment for establishing the private
sector as the engine of economic growth for a middle-income economy. The Reform
Agenda builds on the significant socioeconomic progress that Ethiopia has registered in the
past while also addressing the persistent gaps that still exist today'.
Our reform agenda aims to overcome the aforementioned challenges
through comprehensive and well-synchronized set of measures
| |
! | \
i Control inflation | | |
i | Build rR
ct > S ! or ! Jobs,
reforms | Improve access to finance | | ] inclusive
| i ]
| i rowth
| . i. i | g ,
(Lure debt sutanaomy | | | poverty
| I reduction,
P | Rebalance crealing a
Structural . ! '| growthand | |
= Ease business =
reforms conskain ! enhance ! path to
i productivity | | prosperity
Na
 ee /
-
Address sector-specific
institutional and market
Sectoral
<> failures
reforms
Figure 2: Reforms outlined in the ten-year perspective plan
Source: Prime Minister Office, Ethiopia 2019.
This ten-year perspective plan (for July 2020-June 2030) represents the Governments long-
term vision for development as Ethiopia moves towards middle-income status. Eight broad
priority areas have been identified: macroeconomic reform, structural transformation, industry,
infrastructure, energy, human development, urban development and housing, and population.
The plan details six thematic pillars guiding investment: quality growth, productivity
18 National Planning Commission. 2017. Ethiopia 2017 Voluntary National Review on SDGs.
' hitps: //pmo. gov. etfinitiatives/
18
and competitiveness, sustainable macroeconomic growth, green growth and climate
change, institutional transformation, and private sector development and engagement.
Ethiopias Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) strategy was launched in December
2011. The document outlined the vision, strategy, financing strategy, and institutional
arrangements Ethiopia intended to pursue to attain the goals of low-emission climate-resilient
economic growth. The CRGE Initiative positions Ethiopia at the forefront of the low carbon
revolution as it has become a leading voice among developing countries with regards to setting
and committing to Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) under the global climate
agenda. The CRGE initiative takes a sectoral approach and has identified and prioritized over
60 initiatives, which could help the country achieve its development goals while limiting
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. ?
2.2 Investment-driven development
Investments in Ethiopia have seen rapid growth since the introduction of liberal policies in the
1990s. Along with the increasing domestic investment, there has also been an increasing
interest from foreign investors. FDI in Ethiopia averaged 611 USD million from 2011 until 2020,
reaching an all-time high of 1.3 USD billion in the fourth quarter of 2017.22 The investment-
driven success of Ethiopian economic development is reflected in its impressive annual
growth, averaging a rate of 10.9% between 2004 and 2014, despite not being an oil producer.
The government's commitment towards supportive economic reforms premised on sound
macroeconomic policies, diversification of development (by promoting both agriculture and
industrial development), and the creation of an investment-conducive business environment
supported by infrastructure development, has been touted as a key driver of this
development.
Ethiopia also has several policies aimed at attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows,
such as 30+ bilateral investment promotion and protection agreements, membership of the
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, and incentives for foreign investors like the right to
make remittances out of the country in convertible foreign currency at the prevailing rate of
exchange, fiscal incentives, etc. Other drivers of investment-driven development include
access to the second largest population in Africa and a rapidly growing middle class, a fairly
stable climate for investors, relatively lower levels of corruption, a wide, resource-rich and
fertile territory, and a large labour force. ? Over the last few decades, Ethiopia, through its
industrial strategy has also attracted Asian capital (primarily from China, Turkey and India) to
develop its light manufacturing base.
In recent years, however, there has been a trend of contracting investments in Africa as a
whole. In East Africa, FDI flows decreased by 9% to USD 7.8 billion in 2019. Inflows to Ethiopia
contracted by a fourth to USD 2.5 billion. FDI was adversely affected by instability in certain
20 hittp: //mptf. undp . org/factsheet/fund/3ETO0
2 https: //www preventionweb. net/english/professional/policies/v. php? id=61504
2 https: //tradingeconomics. com/ethiopia/foreign-direct-investment
2 https: /iwww? deloitte. com/content/dam/Deloitte/za/Documents/strateqy/ZA_DevelopingEthiopia_Africa_050216. pdf
2 https: //www. lloydsbanktrade. com/en/market-potential/ethiopia/investment
5 https: /fjournalofeconomicstructures. springeropen. com/articles/10.1186/s40008-020-00211-7
19
parts of the country, including regions with industrial parks. ? This pattern is likely to continue
into the next fiscal year, as the global impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent
economic slowdown continue to affect the investment ecosystem. With the international trend
of favoring ESG compliant investment opportunities on the rise, this is a particularly opportune
moment to bring such international standards and practices into Ethiopian businesses.
2.3 Ethiopian industrial sectors
The Ethiopian Industrial Development Strategic Plan & Roadmap, 2013, identified export-
oriented, labor-intensive industries with wide markets and linkages to the agricultural sector as
priority categories in the manufacturing sector. ? Agro-processing, textile and garment, leather
and leather products, metal and engineering, and chemical and pharmaceutical sectors were
highlighted by the roadmap in particular. The 2019 Homegrown Economic Reform agenda
recognizes the need for the private sector to play a greater role in the economic transformation
of the country. Textile and garment, leather and leather products, agro-processing, sugar and
sugar-related industries, are some of the key export-oriented light manufacturing industries
favored by Ethiopia. These industries are also areas of interest for both the country and the
BRI and were the focus of this study. Brief profiles for these sectors are presented below, with
an in-depth study presented in the subsequent chapters.
Textile and Garment sector: The development of a robust textile and garment sector is a top
priority for Ethiopia as part of its goal to become a middle-income country by 2030. % The
sector's key objective is to bring about the structural transformation of the nations economy
and create thousands of jobs. Ethiopia is providing attractive incentive packages for
investments in this sector, including preferential tax rates and duty-free importation of raw
materials, machinery and equipment for manufacturers as well as an overall conducive
business environment through the establishment of dedicated state-of-the art industrial parks.
A growing number of domestic and multinational companies are becoming part of Ethiopias
textile and garment value chains, making the country a part of the global value chain. Big
sourcing and buying companies such as H&M, Tesco, Walmart and IKEA are now buying from
Ethiopian manufacturers. This has turned Ethiopia into one of the leading textile and apparel
hubs of Africa, which attracts the sector's most FDI in the region and increasingly engages
global brands, retailers and suppliers. Today, 212 textile and garment companies are operating
in Ethiopia, with investments from a variety of countries, in particular from China, India,
Bangladesh and the United States. Out of these 212 companies, about 118 are small and
medium-sized local companies and 94 are medium to large-sized foreign companies. In 2019,
the sector exported goods worth over USD 80 million to European markets alone. *
Horticulture Sector: In the last ten years, Ethiopias horticulture sector has grown rapidly to
become the fourth biggest foreign currency earner of the country. Currently, there are around
126 investments in Ethiopia in the export of flowers, fruits, vegetables, and herbs. Farm
% https: //unctad. org/system/files/official-document/WIR2020 Regional FDI_at_a_glance_Africa. pdf
"https: /iwww. academia . edu/28903445/Ethiopian_Industrial_ Development Strategic Plan_2013 2025 FDRE_Ministry of Indu
stry
2 |nitially planned to be achieved by 2025, as per the country development strategy under GTP II.
2 Based on interviews conducted by consortium partners in 2019.
30 https: //www. themds. com/companies/ethiopia-the-next-front-of-sourcing-in-the-light-of-the-coronavirus-crisis. html
20
ownership is shared between local investors (46), foreign investors (76), joint venture
partnerships (3) and the Development Bank of Ethiopia (1).2' The horticulture sector employs
about 200,000 workers and generated USD 307 million in the 2017/18 fiscal year.
Leather and Leather Products Sector: Ethiopia possesses one of the worlds largest
livestock populations, providing ample opportunity for the development of the leather industry
in the country. However, Ethiopias leather industry has not yet used its potential due to lack
of efficient and coordinated supply of raw hides, skins and other production inputs. In the past
years, different policies with regard to leather exports and value addition have tried to
implement more efficiency into the sector. According to the Ethiopian Leather Industry
Development Institute, currently there are 26 local and 10 foreign tanneries with production
capacities generating about USD 70 million export revenue. In addition to that, there are 16
local and 3 foreign owned footwear companies operating in the leather sector, 4 foreign glove
makers sending gloves to international markets, and 30 leather goods and leather garments
that are being manufactured in Ethiopia.
Agro-processing Sector: Ethiopia aims to increase its agro-processing capacity through the
creation of four dedicated Integrated Agro-Industrial Parks (IAIP). *? Officially, the four |AIPs
will represent USD 1.5 billion in investments, 400 potential business opportunities, and creation
of 400,000 jobs on the long run. The agro-processing sector shall attract companies that export
value-added agricultural products as well as those producing products for domestic
consumption. Major agriculture processing potential in Ethiopia include in cattle fattening and
processing, chicken production and processing, livestock feed manufacturing, wheat-based
food production (e. g. pasta, biscuits), sesame processing (e. g. tahini), soybean crushing (e. g.
soybean oil and feed), sugar production and processing, juice and dairy manufacturing. With
significant changes since 2019 in the importation process of agro-processing machineries and
the privatization of the sugar processing companies, the overall performance of the sector is
expected to grow rapidly in the coming years.
Each of these sectors, with a significant potential of growth in the coming years, could multiply
its opportunities and subsequent benefits by integrating ESG principles within its business
operations.
3 hitps: //ehpea. org/overview-of-the-sectors-growth/
32 https: //www. unido . org/sites/default/files/files/2018-08/Integrated-Agro-Industrial-Parks-in-Ethiopia-booklet. pdf
21
3 International ESG Frameworks
The principles of ESG are rooted in socially responsible investment practices which began in
the 1960s, wherein investors were first seen to apply a negative screening approach to their
decisions. For example, some investors excluded stocks of industries which were involved in
activities such as tobacco production or involvement in the South African apartheid regime
from their portfolios. In present times, these ethics and value-based selections still remain an
integral part of investment decisions, but the considerations have now broadened and include
the areas of environmental and social responsibility and good governance practices. Many
investors are looking to incorporate ESG factors into their investment process alongside
traditional financial analysis. *
The concept of ESG was crystallized in 2006, through the development of a report on the
Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI). The United Nations PRI is now an organization
of signatories who are dedicated to the promotion of ESG principles and strategies in
investment decision making. At the time, 63 signatories composed of asset owners, asset
managers and service providers signed on to incorporating ESG principles in their decision-
making process. The total assets under management was valued at USD 6.5 trillion. As of
October 2020, PRI has seen an incredible growth (as shown in Figure 3) and now comprises
3038 signatories with total Assets Under Management valued at USD 103.4 trillion. *
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2007 2018 2019 2020
Assets under management (USS trillion) ws AD AUM (SUS trillion) wb Number of ADs wh Number of Signatories
Figure 3: PRI Signatories Growth
Source: United Nations Principles for Responsible Reporting
3 https: //www. msci. com/what-is-esqg ;
http: //iwww3 weforum. org/docs/WEF_IBC_Measuring_Stakeholder Capitalism Report 2020. pdf
3 https: //www. unpri. org/pri
22
Subsequently, the concept of ESG has now become a highly relevant tool to evaluate the
overall performance of a company with axes of assessment which go above and beyond
traditional financial reporting. There are a number of ESG Frameworks designed for various
contexts and stakeholders. The figure given below provides a list of some of the most widely
used frameworks in the world currently:
A
ENVIRONMENTAL
International frameworks and reports reviewed
World Bank E&S Framework Taskforce on Climate-related Global Reporting Initiative MSCI ESG Ratings
Financial Disclosures
International Finance Bloomberg Terminal ESG Institutional Accounting UN Global Compact
Corporation Performance Analysis Standards Board
Standards
UN Sustainable Development ~~ Dow Jones Sustainability Sustainalytics Integrated Reporting
Goals Indices
UN Principles of Responsible Global Real Estate CDP Worldwide Climate Disclosure Standards
Investing Sustainability Benchmarks board
KPMG ESG Strategy CDC Group ESG Toolkit WBCSD ESG Disclosure Refinitiv ESG Database
Handbook
NAREIT ESG Framework Sensefolio ESG Framework London Stock Exchange Mercer Investment Framework
Guidelines Group ESG Reporting for Sustainable Growth
Guidelines
Figure 4: International frameworks and reports reviewed for this study
3.1 Key features of ESG frameworks
Since ESG frameworks are developed keeping in mind varied contexts and target
stakeholders, it is difficult to arrive at a one size fits all template for the creation of new
frameworks. However, after reviewing multiple frameworks, it can be concluded that there are
certain key features which are common to the most widely used international frameworks.
These elements are delineated below:
3.1.1 Mission statement and context
A mission statement intends to represent the scope of application of a framework and the
transformative impact it intends to achieve. All elements of a framework are designed to meet
this mission and all signatories of a framework are expected to align themselves with the same.
For instance, the World Bank E&S framework begins with a mention of the World Banks
23
commitment to environmental sustainability, recognizing this as an essential in a world of finite
natural resources. Equally, social development and inclusion are critical for all of the World
Banks development interventions and for achieving sustainable development.
Similarly, the International Finance Corporation mentions in its ESG framework:
IFC's Sustainability Framework articulates the Corporation's strategic commitment to
sustainable development and is an integral part of IFCs approach to risk management. The
Policy on Environmental and Social Sustainability describes IFC's commitments, roles, and
responsibilities related to environmental and social sustainability. IFCs Access to Information
Policy reflects IFCs commitment to transparency and good governance on its operations and
outlines the Corporations institutional disclosure obligations regarding its investment and
advisory services.
The MSCI framework, which is an indexing-based framework rather than a document that lists
out lender requirements, operates a bit differently. The focus is on resource scarcity,
governance standards, global workforce management and evolving regulatory landscapes.
The MSCI ESG ratings take a risks and opportunities approach and focus on the negative
externalities that are generated by an industry and also on the issues that are currently
affecting an industry which can later turn into opportunities that a company may work on solving
and capitalize on.
3.1.2 ESG integration process
This element outlines the protocol for incorporating the principles laid out in the framework into
the business operations and the proposed workflow of the target implementing organizations.
Through extensive literature review it has been found that the frameworks can be of various
types as outlined below.
Some frameworks pose requirements that are mandatory and must be complied with by all
the action takers that are under the jurisdiction of the framework. For instance, under the
guidance of the World Bank E&S Framework, every project funded by the World Bank must
be subject to a thorough environmental and social assessment. The proprietor of a World Bank
funded project is referred to as the Borrower. The Borrower must mandatorily evaluate
environmental and social risks associated with the project and take appropriate steps to
manage and mitigate the risks. The Borrower must also agree upon an Environmental and
Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) which will set out material measures and actions required for
the project to remain consistent with the requirements of the framework set out by the World
Bank.
Other frameworks comprise of recommendations which are purely voluntary and are not
mandatory for those economic entities that are using the framework for their sustainability
related reporting and decision making. For example, the Task Force on Climate-related
Financial Disclosures (TCFD) recommend providing climate-related financial disclosures in
their mainstream annual financial filings. This ensures that the climate-related disclosures are
subject to internal governance processes. It is also recommended that these disclosures are
24
made in reports that are issued at least annually, widely distributed and available to investors
and the general public.
A third type of frameworks is designed to function as indexes or rankings of economic entities
based on their overall sustainability. For instance, the Dow Jones Sustainability Index is a
ranking index which is based on the analysis of corporate economic, environmental and social
performance, assessing issues such as corporate governance, risk management, branding,
climate change mitigation, supply chain standards and labor practices. Index components are
based on free-float market capitalization and most main indexes are reviewed quarterly.
It is important to note that each framework adopts only one of the above modes of operation.
3.1.3 Key performance indicators
This is one of the most important elements of any framework. This section outlines the key
aspects and parameters that are to be considered or reported under all three areas of
Environment, Social and Governance. Performance will be evaluated against these indicators
and will aid in further decision making based on the results obtained upon the application of
the framework.
A comparative study of ten widely used ESG frameworks, including MSCI, Bloomberg, Global
Reporting Initiative among other, reveals Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) under the
categories of E, S and G which are commonly considered and have been mentioned in multiple
frameworks. * These KPI's and their frequency of use (i. e. how many of the ten frameworks
mention the KPI) are given below:
Table 1: Frequency of indicator categories across ESG frameworks
Governance KPI ESG Framework Frequency
Compensation Policy 7/10
ESG Reporting Standards 6/10
Board Level Oversight - ESG 6/10
Governance Policy 6/10
Governance Risk Assessment 6/10
Social KPI ESG Framework Frequency
Supply Chain - Social 8/10
Stakeholder Engagement 7/10
Health and Safety 7/10
Workforce Development/Human Capital 7/10
Diversity and Equal Opportunity 6/10
FBhttps: /www. reit. com/sites/default/files/media/PDFs/Research/Nareit_Guide_to%20ESG_Reporting_2_21_19. pdf
Environmental KPI G Framework Frequency
Climate change opportunities and risk 10/10
Emissions - Green House Gas Emissions 9/10
Environmental Policy 8/10
Energy 8/10
Environmental Management Systems 7/10
Source: Nareit Guide to ESG Reporting Frameworks
26
3.1.4 Operationalization of the ESG framework
This element outlines all the actions that must be taken to ensure that the KPIs are measured
and reported. A protocol is also outlined for performance monitoring and any subsequent
mitigation and management actions that need to be taken in order to ensure that the activities
of the entity in question are satisfactory and within the boundaries set by the framework.
In the case of the World Bank E&S framework, due diligence is completed before the start of
a project to evaluate the environmental risks, opportunities and impacts of the project. The
Borrower also must make a complete evaluation of the same and World Bank ensure that the
ESCP is designed and all risk management/mitigation activities carried out according to the
time frame that is satisfactory to the bank. On the other hand, TCFD recommendations are
less binding. This framework requires voluntary reporting of climate related information on part
of the company in question. This can include various internal environmental and sustainability
audits along with any third-party audits.
The MSCI Ratings methodology involves the collection of data by MSCI, a third-party
aggregator. The MSCI considers 37 key performance indicators and assigns weights to these
indicators based on how relevant they are to a particular industrial sector. These indicators
and weights are reviewed at the end of every calendar year. Based on the performance of a
company against these weighted indicators, a company is assigned a score on a scale of 0-
10, based on which letter grading is then assigned.
3.2 Limitations of ESG frameworks
ESG frameworks are not always comprehensive and have their limitations. There are a number
of difficulties encountered in the creation of frameworks, evaluation of KPIs and
operationalization of the framework recommendations. For instance, a number of KPIs,
especially in the Governance and Social categories are not easily quantifiable and are
therefore harder to report and evaluate. Any KPI that relies on self-reporting could be subject
to corporate bias and credibility issues which could give a skewed representation of the
performance of the entity in question. Frameworks that have been created for adoption by the
global business community could face roadblocks in implementation in different geographical
locations due to variations in regulations, business and political climate and various other
external factors.
27
4 Designing an ESG framework for selected Ethiopian industries
Ethiopia, as a developing country looking to build and bolster its industrial sector, is seeing a
significant influx of foreign investments. At the same time, Ethiopian exports are seeing
growing markets in developed parts of the world, such as Europe and North America. Both
these trends require Ethiopian industries to operate at a formidable standard of quality. At the
same time, the Government of Ethiopia has enshrined sustainability into the very fabric of
economic growth and development by releasing strategic documents and policies that show
commitment to a green economy. In this context, an ESG framework can act as a bridge to a
future that is founded on sustainable development.
ESG has seen a variety of different interpretations and implementations around the world. Due
to the wide nature of the concept, there is a great opportunity to develop a framework that
closely reflects the context within which it will be implemented. This chapter summarizes the
framework that was developed under this project, its tenets, and proposed mechanisms for
implementation.
4.1 Objectives of the ESG framework
The objective of such a framework should be to define pragmatic yet ambitious goals relating
to the E, S and G verticals at a company level and track the progress of these companies
towards achieving these goals. ESG frameworks can have a transformative impact on how
a country performs in terms of its national development goals, the SDGs and the Paris
Agreement. A robust framework should also support the vision for policy development and
implementation at the national and sectoral levels. The proposed ESG Framework has also
considered the need for being
a) replicable to other sectors,
b) intuitive and easily implementable and,
c) a supporting backbone for domestic and foreign investments, rather than simply an
additional layer of efforts.
Finally, the ESG Framework is conscious of the specific industry sector within which it is being
applied and provides corresponding guidance to its users on how continuous improvements
can be achieved.
4.2 Designing and developing the ESG Framework
The ESG Framework for select Ethiopian industrial sectors developed under this project has
been designed to be simple and intuitive in its macroscopic elements, while also remaining
deep enough in its ability to measure progress. The framework has four key components that
it is built on:
I. Foundational elements, which dictate the scope of the framework and how it can be
applied
28
Performance standards, which define the actual, measurable attributes that the
framework seeks to track
Assessment system, which aims to quantify these performance standards
Implementation framework, which outlines the recommended mechanism for the
operationalization of the framework
These components have been summarized in Figure 5 below:
4
v
+
Foundational > Performance ll Assessment system ag Implementation
elements standards framework
Key considerations Category (E, S, G) Category total | Institutional set-up
Staggered approach Indicator Indicator total | Monitoring protocol
Replicability Sub-indicator ighteae | gS
, &
*, Specific questions Answer score o
o, Kd
*e, oo
e, *
, Loo
wy Ld
wy 1
RRL LT YY Li
Figure 5: Outline of the ESG Framework for Ethiopia
29
The following sections present these components in further detail.
4.2.1 Foundational elements
Key considerations
Key considerations are distinct topics that are covered under each category in the framework.
These help in describing the purpose of the framework, and the scope of information
framework intends to capture under the E, S, G headings. Effective ESG strategies require
efforts across each of these considerations. It is particularly important to recognize
Governance as a central piece of the framework, as it leads to the operationalization of efforts
under Social & Environment as well and is often overlooked in conventional sustainability
programs. The framework has broken the key considerations to specific indicators, which have
been further developed into particular sub-indicators. This granular approach provides a
blueprint for sustainability strategies that companies will need to prepare, in implementation of
the framework. Figure 6 describes the key considerations that were identified for the
framework.
Under Governance, the key considerations largely aim to crystallize the interest towards
sustainability at a firm level. This is done by examining high-level commitments such as
mission statements and vision documents, to floor-level efforts in managing sustainability. This
commitment is further bolstered by the presence of tangible steps taken towards ingraining a
culture of ESG know-how, ethical operations and investing in sustainability.
Under Social, it is important to recognize two areas of interest  internal social development,
in the form of employee-friendly non-discriminatory policies and infrastructure and responsive
health & safety processes, and external social impact on consumers and the larger community
as a whole.
The category of Environment covers the inputs and outputs of the industrial processes, by
examining the usage of resources including raw materials, energy, water, etc. , efforts towards
increasing efficiency in the same (both within facility/company and the value chain), and
management of the impact of the companys operations in the form of waste and pollution, as
well as long term impacts such as climate and ecosystem-related.
30
Commitment to ESG across all level
Investment in sustainability oO
Capacity development in ESG (
Ethics & transparency (
Mandatory & voluntary labor standards (
Key
Occupation health & safety [ 923 Considerations
. . . of ESG Framework
Product design & customer interaction  for Ethiopia
Community betterment 
Resource usage and dependencies 
Resource efficiency across value chain 
Waste & pollution management  o
Climate & ecosystem impact
Figure 6: The key considerations for the ESG Framework for Ethiopia
Staggered approach
As described in the previous chapter, ESG frameworks vary as per applications. Many
development institutes  indeed, some of the first approaches applied under ESG frameworks
 employed a mandatory compliance-based design, intended to ensure a certain minimal level
of sustainability in the respective companies. Many multilateral agencies and collectives have
evolved voluntary schemes that take a similar approach while participation into the scheme
is not mandated, a stringent monitoring protocol is implemented as opposed to a more relaxed,
voluntary one. Competitive, market-based indices or rankings have also been on the rise,
bringing with them a focus on frequent third-party audits and measuring performance as
response to volatile situations. A single ESG framework usually applies only one type of design
(voluntary, compliance driven or competitive index), however, in this particular ESG
framework, these three types have been envisioned as three integrated steps of
Ethiopias growing focus on aligning economic development to sustainability priorities
demonstrates a high potential for growth in sustainable business practices. Keeping this in
31
mind, it is recommended that the Ethiopian industrial sector takes advantage of the global
learning on ESG by applying a staggered approach to the same. In this context, a multi- step
(or phase) implementation plan (as shown in Figure 7 below) is recommended. This hybrid
approach will implement three different designs of the framework sequentially, applying the
lessons from the preceding steps into the design of the subsequent ones. It should be noted,
however, that the core of the framework (particularly the performance standards) are not
changing. Rather, the requirements applied on industries and the rigidity of target-setting is
evolving as the capacity to deliver on sustainable practices develops. The three steps are
described below:
1. Voluntary compliance: Companies operating in the target sectors can be invited to
participate in a voluntary scheme for ESG compliance, as a pilot project. The aim of this
project would be to contextualize and calibrate a larger ESG plan. For this voluntary
compliance scheme, certain sector-level minimum standards, as well as more ambitious
company-specific targets could be set, with a total project duration of about 1.5-2 years. A
baselining exercise for the participating companies would be carried out within the first
quarter of the scheme launch, with half-yearly self-audits and yearly third-party audits. The
experience of implementation and the results at the end of the project period can be used
to prepare a mandatory ESG compliance scheme. In order to attract participants, this
scheme could be linked to fiscal incentives that can be availed by the company and
potentially its investors. This would be especially important for local companies who might
need the support of an external fund or program to meet the costs of running such a
scheme. Providing certification of performance improvement could also be explored, as
they would provide a testament for high quality performance and operations, thus
significantly improving reputation and perspectives on the company.
2. Compliance-driven development (greening the baseline): Once suitable use-cases of
ESG compliance are available in an industry sector, the rest of it could be brought up to a
minimum, uniform level of sustainable business practices. It is hence necessary to
implement a compliance driven development program by having a binding legislation that
demands the implementation of certain key aspects of ESG, including but not limited to:
a. Company level and sector level sustainability-driven strategy plans that cover aspects
such as capacity development, investment into sustainability, and adoption of green
programs and practices;
b. Labor plans, programs and practices that enshrine all relevant existing decrees, along
with adequate H&S guidelines and training manuals;
c. Appropriate resource, waste and pollution monitoring processes that meet the
standards set for industries by the Environment, Forestry and Climate Change
Commission (EFCCC).
The intention of this stage is to create a greener baseline for all subsequent developments in
the sector. A uniform, sector specific target needs to be set, based on high-level consultations
with industry unions, EFCCC, EIC, MOTI, and other important stakeholders. Stringent
monitoring protocols that require submission of annual sustainability performance review
plans, featuring third party audits is critical to ensure that this baseline is effectively developed
32
over a period of 3-5 years. Such a program will also help demonstrate to foreign investors the
FOROX
Competitive Index
participation
sustainable nature of business assured in Ethiopia.
Compliance driven
development
Voluntary
compliance
 Pilot effort towards ESG + Mandatory minimum * Long-term strategy for
+ Help drive context-linking sustainability standards to ensuring commitment to
of global standards be met by all companies in sustainability
+ Will provide the a sector + Potentially developing a
foundation for  Relative growth in homegrown rating
compliance-driven performance over previous system that is linked
development efforts year to/based on a globally-
 Limited scope interms of ~~ + Pragmatic and achievable renowned standard
sectors and number of goal setting
participants + Intermediate step towards
building sustainability into
industries
Figure 7: A staggered approach to ESG
3. Competitive index participation (a marketplace for ESG): A longer term plan could be to
invite existing global sustainability indices to integrate with a homegrown one in consultation
with international agencies, and also encourage companies to compete with regards to ESG.
A competitive system encourages innovation and brings design thinking to matters relating to
sustainability. Ratings are also a good means to demonstrate that the quality and rigor of
Ethiopian businesses are at par with the international best performers.
Replicability
Replicability of the framework in different sectors without the loss of either meaning or value is
a crucial design element that has been built into the framework. Given that this project
addresses sustainability of investments in selected sectors, and that the notion of ESG itself
could have a far larger scope, it was deemed important to build the macroscopic elements as
largely sector neutral. As demonstrated by the key considerations presented above, the
framework seeks to encapsulate a range of information from each company, and not a specific
data point. They can thus be applied to other sectors without much loss of meaning. This
enables easy replication of the framework into new sectors without significant redesign. On the
33
other hand, if adequate context-specific information is not captured by the framework, the true
performance of a company cannot be adequately determined, For this reason, the
performance standards have been developed in a manner that at a micro-level, the framework
is able to gather relevant sector-specific information, while at a macro-level, the criteria for
comparison remain common. At this point, it is also important to acknowledge that while all
sectors may have comparable criteria for sustainability, their individual contribution may (and
in some cases, should) vary from sector to sector. This is actualized by developing a
performance standard assessment system which allocates differential scoring at both criteria
and a category level. This system is explained in further detail later in the chapter.
4.2.2 Performance standards
Performance standards are implementable and measurable forms of key considerations,
designed to be able to capture vital information. These standards have two main purposes 
to establish granular targets for every key consideration, and to track growths and
improvements in a company at a disaggregated level. These performance standards have
been designed based on the experience of the project consortium, literature review, and expert
engagements. While each performance standard can be used as an indicator, they can also
be broken into sub-indicators. * Performance standards are common across sectors, while
their components are sector-specific wherever possible. This allows for an easy
comparison across different companies and industry types. Performance standards developed
for the project are given below:
G.1. Sustainability Commitment G.2. Sustainability Expertise G.3. Sustainability in Operations
G.1.1 Mission Statement G.2.1 Employee Training G.3.1 Supply Chain
G.1.2 Corporate Policies G.2.2 Dedicated Experts & Resources G.3.2 Product Design
G.1.3 Management Systems &
G.1.4 Code of Ethics
G.4. Transparency G.5. Economy
G.4.1 Audits G.5.1 Job Creation
G.4.2 Public Disclosure of Audits G.5.2 Profits
G.5.3 Innovation & R&D
% |n the subsequent sub-chapter, these standards will be further disaggregated into a detailed questionnaire that can be used
for various purposes such as baselining and performance tracking.
34
S.1. Employee Welfare & Standards
S$.1.1 General Labor Standards
$.1.2 Child Labor & Forced Labor
$.1.3 Salary
S.1.4 Other Benefits
$.1.5 Grievance System
S$.2. Occupational Health & Safety
$.2.1 Rules & Procedures
$.2.2 Equipment
$.2.3 Emergency Response Mechanisms
$.2.4 Dedicated Personnel
$.3. Training & Capacity Building
$.3.1 Health & Safety Training
S.4. Equal Opportunities/Non-
Discrimination
S.4.1 Fair & Transparent Hiring Practice
S.4.2 Inclusive Workplace
$.5. Product Safety
$.5.1 Testing
$.5.2 Standards
S.6. Customer Relations
$.6.1 Customer Satisfaction
S.7. Local Community Betterment
S$.7.1 Positive Impact on Local
Workforce & Businesses
$.7.2 Corporate Social Responsibility
E.1. Energy
E.1.1 Energy Management Practices
E.1.2 Energy Efficiency
E.1.3 Renewable Energy
E.1.4 Energy Management System
E.2. Water
E.2.1 Water Management - Practices &
Processes
E.2.2 Water Efficiency
E.4. Pollution
E.4.1 Air Pollution
E.4.2 Water Pollution
E.4.3 Land Pollution
E.4.4 Noise Pollution
E.5. Procurement
E.5.1 Raw Material
E.5.2 Packaging
E.5.3 Durability
E.5.4 Procurement Practices
E.3. Waste
E.3.1 Waste Management - Practices &
E.3.2 Non-Hazardous Waste
Management
E.3.3 Hazardous Waste Management
E.3.4 Awareness Raising on Waste
Management Practices
E.7. Climate Action
E.7.1 Carbon Footprint & Carbon
Markets
E.7.2 Climate Resilience
E.8. Ecosystem Impacts
E.8.1 Biodiversity
E.8.2 Habitat
E.6. Resource Efficiency
E.6.1 Manufacturing Efficiency
E.6.2 Eco-Design
Figure 8: Performance standards (indicators and sub-indicators) considered under the ESG Framework
35
The list of indicators considered under the ESG Framework for Ethiopia is substantially wider
than that of most frameworks. This has been done keeping in mind the expectations to use
this framework as a foundation for sustainable investments in the concerned sectors. As a
baselining exercise with only high-level and generic indicators is sure to leave out essential
information on a companys current and expected efforts towards sustainability, the list of
performance standards given above provide an almost audit-level depth, thus building a more
robust and informed baseline. The drawback of such a detailed list is that the key indicators
considered (5, 7 and 8 under G, S and E respectively) and their numerous components
collectively present a rather complex assessment. To mitigate this concern, the system of
scoring evolved for the framework allows users to generate contextualized, category-
wise scores. This assessment system is explained below.
4.2.3 Assessment system
The framework intends to balance the complexity brought by having a detailed set of indicators,
with the clarity and intuitiveness of single value totals. In other words, the main challenge for
the assessment system has been to ensure that high-level total scores could be generated
while taking into account the differences in priorities of indicators and sub-indicators. For this
reason, the framework assumes that all questions are equally relevant. The assessment
system applies an additive approach to the calculations. First, every question is scored on a
scale of 0-1, where 0 is awarded to the least desirable responses, 1 to the most desirable
response, while fraction scores such as 0.25, 0.5 and 0.75 are awarded to answers with
intermediate desirability. The score of a sub-indicator is the average score of its questions,
expressed as a percentage. Thus, if a sub-indicator has three questions with the scores of 0.5,
0 and 1, the score of the sub-indicators is (0.5+0+1)/3 or 0.5. Second, at the sub-indicator
level, a weightage is assigned, that can vary between 0-3. Sub-indicators weighed as 1 are
low priority while those weighed as 3 are high priority. 0 weightage is given to sub-indicators
deemed irrelevant to the analysis.
Finally, scores for higher levels are simply the sum of their components. So, the score of an
indicator is the sum of score of the sub-indicators. Similarly, at the category level, the score is
the sum of score of all indicators. At the category level, the framework recommends expressing
the score as a percentage to enable comparison across contexts (as the absolute totals may
vary from application to application). The calculation methodology is represented in Figure 9.
37 This assumption was put in place to ensure that indicators with more questions do not automatically have higher shares of
scores. A previous iteration of the framework applied two levels of weightages  at a question level and at a sub-indicator level.
Disproportionate skewing in favor of large question sets was observed, due to which changes at question or sub-indicator levels
had little to no impact on the totals at indicator and category level. Due to this non-sensitive nature, a single level of weightage
was preferred. Further versions of frameworks, especially automized ones, could consider such multi- weightages again.
% This option could be used to develop a lite version of the framework if needed, where certain indicators/sub-indicators are
not assessed.
36
Vv CATEGORY
INDICATOR LEVEL
A 4 LEVEL
SUB-INDICATOR
LEVEL
QUESTIONS
Category score =
indicator scores
Indicator score = 3 sub-
Weight is assigned to indicator scores
sub-indicator (between
0-3)
Question is scored
between 0-1 (including
fractions)
Sub-indicator score =
average question score
x weight
Average question score
for a sub-indicator =
> question
score/number of
questions
Figure 9: Methodology for the assessment system
The weightage of the sub-indicators can be varied from sector to sector, so that the priorities
identified by the assessment is in line with the ground reality. Impact of the variation in total
score between categories or even sectors can be circumvented by the percentage score. The
consortiums weightages for sub-indicators for the five sectors that was used to assess the 18
case studies is given in annex lll.
4.2.4 Implementation framework
Institutional set-up
In order to ensure that there is sustained implementation of the framework, there is a need for
a dedicated, national level body that is in charge of overseeing efforts towards enshrining ESG.
This body will work with key government ministries and agencies to develop the vision and
national ESG strategy, which, on agreement by government ministries, will be adopted to
sectoral targets and roadmaps, in discussion with key industrial unions. The national level body
will also empanel auditors to provide support in the first baselining exercise and carry out
subsequent audits. Companies will directly report the results of their half-yearly self-audits to
this national body. Yearly third-party reviews will be conducted with all high-level stakeholders
to present the progress made during the year, and to implement any course corrections if
necessary. The national level body will also leverage existing knowledge within the industries
through linkages with the BRI-SIP, UNDP and other relevant partners. The recommended
institutional set-up is given below:
37
Knowledge exchange
Yearly industry performance ~~ _....... National
report  .
Strategic direction  Emerging trends and best J
Policy development practices .
p p
IN i  RAGS Tee :
Relevant ministries Multilateral agencies
and agencies 4 |
Audit report
{possibly} Sector
performance report
Self audit
Performance report
Goals and strategy for next FY
Incentives & disincentives
Guidelines & regulations
Individual
Socio-environmental
performance audit
b> Companies
Figure 10: Proposed institutional set-up
The specific nature of this national level body is to be decided by relevant high-level actors
such as the EIC, MOTI, EFCCC etc. A steering committee approach can be applied to ensure
a quick implementation; however, such a committee would have limited power and financial
support to effectively carry out the aforementioned roles and responsibilities. The
implementation body could also be designed as a secretariat housed within a key government
agency such as the MOTI or EIC  such a body would require significant time and resources
for development but will also have greater power and longevity to oversee the development of
ESG practices in the country.
Implementation & monitoring
As discussed in the previous sections, the framework will rely on periodic self-conducted as
well as third-party audits to track company performance and progress. The national level body
would be responsible for disaggregating developmental goals of the country, its NDCs and the
SDGs into ESG ambitions by developing sustainability strategies and roadmaps at sectoral
levels.
Sectoral targets will not only help drive macrolevel decision-making and course-correction, but
also provide a useful metric for measuring performance in line with the CRGE strategy and
other similar programs. The extensive baselining exercise, outlined for both the pilot project
and the large-scale compliance program, can be conducted using guidelines and questionnaire
developed in this project. With support from industrial associations, sectoral targets would
need to be disaggregated to company level minimum requirements as well as more ambitious
targets. While the minimum requirements should be uniform across the sector (as an effort
towards greening the baseline), the ambitious targets should be self-declared by companies.
38
The implementation of the framework should by cyclical in nature, with a pre-defined cycle
length (Anywhere between 2-5 years), at the end of which a detailed assessment of the entire
program must be conducted. It is critical to ensure that all targets set are in line with the cycle
length (i. e. shorter cycles have less ambitious targets than longer ones). The detailed cycle
assessment should be presented in front of all high-level stakeholders, and the following
discussion should provide the foundation for the next cycle strateg
4.3 ESG policy gaps and relevant institutions
4.3.1 ESG policy gaps
This sub-chapter identifies ESG policy gaps by analyzing provisions of relevant national
policies and regulations against the ESG Framework outlined in Chapter 4.2. above and
contained in Annex |. For each of the sections on Governance, Social and Environmental
relevant existing legal provisions where matched against sub-indicators. Using a traffic light
system with gaps (red), partial gaps (yellow) and no gaps (green), the result of this exercise is
shown in Annex Il and briefly summarized in Table 2 below:
Table 2: Summary of ESG Framework policy gaps by section and sub-indicator
Most gaps exist regarding sub-indicators of the sections on Environmental (66%) and
Governance (62%). For the Environmental section, gaps regarding the following aspects
should be highlighted: energy use and energy efficiency equipment and practices, use of off-
grid renewable energy sources as back-up for power outages, water use and water efficiency,
waste management practices and awareness-raising thereof, noise pollution, procurement
practices, making use of carbon markets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, increasing
climate resilience of company operations and taking actions to prevent the loss of biodiversity.
For the Governance section, sub-indicators that currently do not seem to be reflected in
national policy or regulation include the sustainability commitment, policies and management
system of a company as well as issues regarding in-house expertise on sustainability issues
the design of supply chains and products in a sustainable manner. For the Social section, most
sub-indicators seem to be partially (18%) or fully (71%) covered by existing national policies
and regulations. The findings of the case studies presented in Chapter 5 underline this finding
by showing that the highest scores achieved by companies across industry sectors are in the
Social section. Two notable exceptions regarding the comprehensive existing legislation in this
area are with regard to competitive salaries and inclusive hiring practices and production
facilities.
39
4.3.2 Relevant institutions
Addressing the policy and regulatory gaps identified in sub-chapter 4.3.1. above to attract the
right type of investment based on ESG criteria requires a concerted effort between different
government ministries, specialized commissions and agencies, industrial development
institutes and sectoral business associations. Despite Ethiopias great progress in this area,
the identified policy gaps show the need to further increase efforts towards a more ESG
compatible industrialization process. Especially in the Governance and Environmental areas
the existing legislation could be strengthened or new legislation developed. The following
institutions have been identified as critical players in this context based on their agenda setting
capabilities and through their deep sectoral knowledge:
Ministries:
Ministry of Trade and Industry (MoT)
Ethiopian Chamber of Commerce and Sectoral Associations (ECCSA)
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (MoLSA)
Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation (MoFEC)
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA)
Ministry of Innovation and Technology (MINT)
Ministry of Education (MoE)
Ministry of Science and Higher Education (MoSHE)
Commissions:
Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC)
Environment, Forestry and Climate Change Commission (EFCCC)
Job Creation Commission (JCC)
Agencies:
Agricultural Transformation Agency
Ethiopian Standards Agency (ESA)
Public Procurement & Property Administration Agency (PPPAA)
Specialized Entities:
Industrial Parks Development Corporation (IPDC)
Ethiopian Industrial Inputs Development Enterprise (EIIDE)
Sectoral Associations:
Ethiopian Textile and Garment Manufacturers Association (ETGMA)
The Ethiopian Horticulture Producer Exporters Association (EHPEA)
Ethiopian Leather Industries Association (ELIA)
Ethiopian Tanners Association (ETA)
Ethiopian Cotton Producers, Ginners and Exporters Association (ECPGA)
Industrial Development Institutes:
Ethiopian Textile Industry Development Institute (ETIDI)
Ethiopian Institute of Textile and Fashion Technology (EITFT)
Ethiopian Leather Industry Development Institute (LIDI)
40
Tm
Commitment to ESG across al level
Investment in sustainability
Capacity development in ESG
Ethics & transparency
Aligned fo Staggered
national vision
h
& strategy Ra
&o
Cyclical / periodic Sector considerate
sanjead
Mandatory & voluntary labor standards
Nuanced Replicabl
assessment eplicanie o Occupation health & safety W
Product design & customer interaction
 for Ethiopia
Resource usage and dependencies
Waste & pollution management 
185
==
SDG
Linkages
5 Case Studies
5.1 Objective
The objective of the deep-dive consultations with 18 companies across the four industrial
focus sectors has been two-fold:
1. To understand where sectors and companies stand in terms of sustainability of their
operations and what challenges they face in this regard; and
5.2 Methodology
Criteria for the selection of case study companies have been developed in close collaboration
with the Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) and the United Nations Development
Programs (UNDP) country office in Ethiopia and included a balance between: the four
industrial focus sectors with the sugar and sugar-related industry treated as distinct sub-sector
under agro-processing; the geographic regions within the country; companies located within
Following the selection criteria, a short-list of suitable potential case study companies was
developed from which 18 companies were selected for deep-dive consultations. These 18 case
studies were then carried out through a survey and in-person interviews with managers and
other company employees from July to October 2020. The following sub-chapter 5.3. gives a
more in-depth overview of the case study companies to serve as context for the case study
results. Findings on institutional, economic, social and environmental sustainability of the case
study companies are then presented in sub-chapter 5.4. based on their assessment against
the ESG Framework. Finally, sub-chapter 5.5. provides insights on how the results of the case
studies helped to refine the ESG Framework proposed in chapter 4.
5.3 Case study companies
Figure 11 below shows the names, locations, industrial sectors and ownership structure for the
18 case study companies, including four companies from the garment and textile industry, five
from the leather and leather product industry, four from the horticulture industry, five from the
agro-processing industry, including one from the sugar and sugar-related industry. Travel
restrictions imposed due to the COVID-19 pandemic made it necessary to focus on companies
located in Addis Ababa and its vicinity. These restrictions also limited the selection of
companies located in industrial parks and the number of companies owned fully or partially by
local investors.
3 While the study had initially only foreseen four case studies, the number of case studies was increased to 18 to obtain more
salient results across, including perspectives of both foreign-owned and domestic-owned companies in each of the four industrial
sectors and a separate case study from the sugar and sugar-related industry.
42
Etur Textile PLC Kanoria Africa Textile PLC MNS Manufacturing PLC Nuoya Textile Investment PLC
Addis Ababa Bishoftu Addis Ababa
Garment & Textile Garment & Textile Garment & Textile
 N
- [C- [ == |
Ta
Case study Rv Modio_
3 Leather & Leather Products
companies by name,
location, industry A 7
3 7 pr New Wing Addis Shoe PLC
sector and 3 ie ya PIT pres
ownership origin pF NE SV we] Leather & Leather Products
3 a
3 a EJ
Metehara Sugar Factory
rs Pittards Ethiopia
Metehara abe
n Leather & Leather Products
1 ay
malas
Richy Food Processing PLC , Zhang Jianxin Tannery
Agro-processing oy ) a
Dukem } i . & Leather Products
 | . , Ss
NNO
East Africa Bottling SC N a AgriFlora PLC
Addis Ababa 3 Haleta
SER
he
hs
Awash Wine SC Ashraf Industrial PLC JoytechPLC Hansa Flower PLC Flowerama PLC
Addis Ababa Bahir Dar Addis Ababa Addis Ababa Holeta
Horticulture Horticulture Harticulture
Figure 11: Overview of case study companies by name, location, industrial sector and ownership origin
Further information on the selected case study companies is provided in the tables below.
Table 3: Case study companies in the garment and textile industry
Po Nuoya
WETUR orniea Textile
2010 textile PLC Investment
PLC
Year of 2010 2012 2013 2011
establishment
Products Fibers, yarns, fabrics, Yarns, fabrics & | Fabrics, yarns, carpets | Bedsheets,
garments garments & towels blankets,
carpets
Number of 260 1200 750 870
employees
Ownership Foreign (Turkey) Foreign (India) Foreign (Turkey/UAE) Foreign
structure (China)
Website www. eturtextile. com www. kanoria- www. mnstextile. com n/a
africa. com
43
Table 4: Case study companies in the leather and leather product industry
Houdao Zhang Jianxin
BFA arene Chen \ ) Tannery
am e Tannery NEW WING outardy
Year of 1935 2016 2016 2005 2011
Products Footwear Leather Leather & Gloves, Leather
footwear footwear,
leather
goods
Number of Ca. 2000 Ca. 600 Ca. 1000 600 Ca. 230
Ownership Local Foreign Foreign Foreign (UK) | Foreign (China)
structure (China) (China)
Website www. anbessashoe | not applicable www. newwi | www. pittards | n/a
sc. com ng. com. hk . com
Table 5: Case study companies in the horticulture industry
Agri Flora PLC Flowerama | Hansa Flowers
PLC (Oromia Wonders Joytech
PLC) fresh
Year of 2006 2017 2015 2003
Products Flowers Flowers Flowers Herbs and flowers
Number of Ca.260 Ca. 250 Ca. 320 Ca. 1500
Ownership Foreign (? ) Local Foreign (UAE) Foreign (Israel)
structure
Website http: //agriberries. com/ not applicable WWW. WWW.
hansaflowers. com joytechfresh. com
44
industry
we | Gatti Metahara
APA DL) Sugar 2
L | ashiine Factory | (4
Year of 1996 1936 1959 1970 2019
Products Edible oil Wine Beverages | Sugar, Food and
molasses beverage
and ethanol | packaging
Number of Ca. 300 Ca. 670 Ca. 2200 Ca. 5000 Ca. 30
Ownership Foreign (Sudan) Local / Local / Local Foreign (China)
structure Foreign Foreign
(UK) (South
Africa)
Website www. ashraf. com. et | www. awa | www. cocac | not applicable n/a
shwines. c | olasabco. c
om om
5.4 Results
The assessment of the 18 case study companies was carried out against the draft ESG
Framework as presented in Chapter 4 above and Annex | below. To allow for comparison
across sectors, the same indicators and sub-indicators were used for all case study
companies. At the same time some questions and weightages of sub-indicator were adjusted
to reflect sector-specific aspects. After the initial assessment of four case study companies,
some slight adjustments were made to the assessment framework. The high-level overview of
scoring of case study companies by category and industrial sector are included in Table 7
below. At the sector-level, the agro-processing industry, including sugar and sugar-related
products ranks the highest with an average of 61% of the maximum score reached by case
study companies. Also, the overall highest-ranking company of the assessment (73%) is part
of this group of case study companies. On the other end of the spectrum there is the leather
and leather products industry, whose case study companies only achieved 38% of the
maximum score on average. It is also in this sector that the two overall lowest-ranking
companies are found with an average of 25% and 27% of achievable points, respectively. The
garments and textile and horticulture sectors almost came out at par with a case study
company average of 55% and 53% of the maximum total score, respectively. The overall
second-highest company ranking was achieved in the horticulture sector with a total of 72% of
the attainable score. With regard to the scoring of categories, case study companies of the
45
agro-processing sector, including sugar and sugar related products, scored in average the
highest on Governance (58%), the horticulture sector on Social (78%), narrowly followed by
agro-processing (76%) and garment and textile (75%) sectors, and companies from the agro-
processing sector, including sugar and sugar-related products also scored the highest in the
Environmental category (48%).
Table 7: Overview of results of the ESG Framework assessment of case study companies by categories
and industrial sectors
Total average Governance Social average Environmental
Industrial sector Caxeipance Social score FETAL. Total score goorelhy average score by score by average score by
score score industrial industrial sector industrial sector industrial sector
Kanoria Textile 41% 78% 51% 57%
MNS Garment Garment & 53% 81% 43% 59%
ETUR Textile Textile 56% 79% 42% 59% SEE ( = ER
Nuoya Textile 40% 60% 35% 45%
Anbessa Shoes 23% 44% 19% 29%
Houdao Chen Tannery 10% 50% 16% 25%
Zhang liankin Tannery | LATE ggg 54% 8% 27% 38% 34% 61% 21%
New Wing Addis Shoes 54% 81% 29% 55%
Pittards Ethiopia 65% 75% 31% 57%
Agri Flora 59% 78% 15% 51%
Flowerama i 35% 67% 17% 40%
ew Horticulture 22% 74% 319% 29% 53% 55% 78% 27%
Joytech 83% 91% 43% 72%
Ashraf Industrial 49% 66% 38% 51%
Awash Wine Agr o-processing, 53% 80% 54% 62%
East African Botting _"OUIENEYT 68% 94% 57% 73% 61% 58% 76% 48%
Richy Food products 52% 70% 45% 56%
Metahara Sugar 70% 71% 44% 62%
5.4.1 Governance
The Governance category includes sub-categories on Sustainability Commitment,
Sustainability Expertise, Sustainability Design, Transparency and Accountability and
Economic Sustainability. Scores per sub-category by case study company are included in
Table 8 below.
46
Industrial sector Sustainability Sustainability ~~ Sustainability Transparency & Economic
Commitment Expertise Design Accountability Sustainability
Kanoria Textile 40% 0% 25% 73% 83%
MNS Garment 35% 50% 79% 67% 42%
Garment & Textile
ETUR Textile 33% 100% 68% 40% 42%
Nuoya Textile 15% 50% 36% 53% 67%
Anbessa Shoes 35% 0% 14% 40% 0%
Houdao Chen Tannery 2% 0% 0% 27% 33%
Zhang Jianxin Tannery Leather & Leather 79% 0% 25% 27% 33%
New Wing Addis Shoes 60% 50% 50% 40% 83%
Pittards Ethiopia 85% 50% 36% 100% 50%
Agri Flora 62% 50% 29% 87% 0%
Flowerama 27% 50% 29% 27% 44%
Horticulture
Hansa Flower 66% 50% 29% 40% 0%
Joytech 80% 100% 57% 83% 0%
Ashraf Industrial 45% 100% 38% 67% 0%
Awash Wine Agro-processing, 29% 100% 62% 100% 0%
East African Bottling _InClUdingsugar ggg 100% 100% 87% 0%
and sugar-related
Richy Food products 43% 100% 43% 13% 0%
Metahara Sugar 89% 100% 67% 87% 0%
Sustainability Commitment: Mission, Corporate Policies, Management System and
Standards and Code of Ethics
Eight out of the 18 case study companies demonstrated advanced level of commitment
towards sustainability by scoring above 50% of the maximum score. These companies
demonstrated a pro-active implementation of sustainability policies, hiring of dedicated experts
or the explicit mentioning of ESG relevant aspects in their mission statements. Especially
companies from the agro-processing sector, including sugar and sugar-related products as
well as from the and horticulture sector, scored high and seem to be more active in establishing
sustainability commitment in their production processes. Companies from the leather and
leather products sector also maintain a sustainability commitment within their governance
structure by following ISO certified management standards in their day-to-day operations or
through the establishment of sophisticated water treatment facility to manage waste
responsibly. The overall average score on Sustainability Commitment in the garment and
textile sector is 50%.
As Figure 12 below indicates, almost all companies interviewed have some sort of ESG policy
in place. Health and Safety Policy (16), Environmental Policy (14), Equal Opportunity Policy
(12), Social Responsibility Policy (10), Environmental Policy (9) and Anti-Corruption/Anti-
Bribery Policy (9).
47
Anti-Corruption/Anti-bribery Policy 4 2
Equal Opportunities Policy 4 1 3
Health and Safety Policy 4 3 4
Environmental Policy 4 3 2
m Agro-Processing m Garment & Textile m Horticulture
m Leather & Leather Products m Sugar Sector
Figure 12: Sustainability policies applied by sector
The level of certified standards varies among the interviewed companies. Companies with
strong foreign shareholder or government involvement (Pittards Ethiopia, East Africa Bottling,
Metahara Sugar Factory) have Environmental Management Standard (ISO 14001) in place.
Most of the interviewed companies have sector specific standards in place. For example,
companies in the horticulture sector (Agri Flora and Joytech) both have G. A. P. standards*
implemented. Companies in the Garment & Textile sector (Kanoria Africa Textiles, MNS
Manufacturing and Etur Textile) have OECO Tex*' or Business Social Compliance Initiative
(BSCI)*? implemented. Only four companies (Metahara Sugar Factory, Pittards Ethiopia, East
Africa Bottling) have so far implemented ISO 9001 (see Figure 13).
Does your company have any of the standards in place?
Out of 18 respondents
ISO 14001 or similar
ISO 9001* or similar
1ISO37001 or similar
OHSAS 18001 or similar
6]
Others
(ISO 22000, GAP, BAC, SMETA, OECO-TEX,..
Figure 13: Sustainability standards applied by interviewed companies
Awash Wine and Richy Food are currently in the process getting ISO certification
0 https: //www. globalgap. org/uk_en/
1 https: /iwww. oeko-tex. com/enfour-standards
2 https: /fwww. amfori. org/content/amfori-bsci
48
While some companies have shown strong sustainability commitment, it is not always obvious
that the commitment translates into sustainability expertise. Sustainability expertise is
comprised of regular employee training, dedicated experts & resources, established supplier
selection process and utilization of sustainable designs for production or packaging.
In this regard, companies in the agro-processing and sugar related sector, in the horticulture
and garment and textile sectors have scored the highest points for sustainability expertise
showing a dynamic development process towards sustainability within these sectors. On the
other hand, three companies from the leather sector scored the least points (0%) for
sustainability expertise, reflecting a structural governance issues within the sector. Those
companies with strong commitment and expertise have established dedicated departments or
have hired dedicated personnel overseeing aspects of sustainability and good governance
(Figure 14 below).
Sustainability Commitment: Employee Training and Dedicated Experts and Resources
To boost the sustainability expertise of companies, dedicated experts are dealing with
environmental, health and safety and quality standards. For example, a company in the agro-
processing sector has established a Safety, Health and Environment (SHE) department with
dedicated professional staffs and another in the horticulture sector established a dedicated
department for audit, standards and certification with a total 4 personnel (auditor, assistants,
and a trainer).
Do you have dedicated experts (and/or
department) on sustainability and good
governance?
mYes mNo min development
Figure 14: % share of companies employing dedicated ESG experts
In addition, to increase the sustainability expertise, majority of the interviewed companies have
indicated that they provide regular training to employees on aspects of ESG, including hygiene,
anti-harassment, different manufacturing practices or emergency management. These
companies also provide regular training to their employees on production process, companys
social norms as well as on aspects related to environment management, such as waste
49
management. Companies that are in the process of getting ISO certified send their
management staff to regular training to absorb the management practices of different
international standards.
No
17%
Yes
83%
Figure 15: % of companies providing ESG training to employees
pa Shoes: Talent acquisition program
As the company is always in need of skilled workforce it established its own training program to
recruit and train new entrants independently. Through its talent acquisition program, the company
offers training to its prospective future employees while paying them a per-diem from the start. By
the time the employees take on responsibilities within the company, they are well prepared and
motivated to start. Once they enter the company, they receive further training to boost productivity.
Sustainability Design: Supply Chain and Product Design
Sustainability design refers to supplier selection process as well as how companies are utilizing
product designs to advance ESG in their companies. In their day-to-day process, out of 15
respondents 11 have highlighted to have a supplier selection process, with six having a formal
and documented procedure in selecting their suppliers, while five are using informal and
undocumented approach (see Figure 16 below). In selecting suppliers, responding companies
from the horticulture and agro-processing sector sectors scored the highest points, with East
Africa Bottling scoring the highest score of 100%. Joytech a horticulture scoring overall 57% is
explicitly looking at sustainable business practices when selecting suppliers. Other
respondents emphasize financial stability, environmental and social commitment, product
reliability and past references when selecting suppliers (Methahra Sugar Factory, East Africa
Bottling, Awash Wine and MNS Manufacturing). Those with no formal selection process, often
scoring low on sustainability design, only check for price competitiveness by obtaining different
3 Awash Wine, Richy Food
50
offers from suppliers. Companies receiving their inputs directly from their parent company also
do not undertake formal or informal supplier selection, scoring overall lower on this indicator.
Do you have a supplier selection process?
7 6
6 5
5 4
3
1
0
Yes (formal & Yes (informal & No
documented) undocumented)
Figure 16: Type of supplier selection process
Transparency and Accountability: Audits and Public Disclosure
Transparency and accountability refer to formal auditing process and the public disclosure of
these audits for public consumption. Companies such as Pittards Ethiopia, Awash Wine scored
the highest point (100%) as they regularly undertake and publish their audits. Again companies
in the agro-processing and horticulture sector score high in this regard with Metahara Sugar
Factory, Agri Flora and East Africa Bottling (all 87%) and Joytech (83%). Agri Flora states on
its website that it has obtained the Bronze Level as per the Code of Practice*, this indicates
our readiness and our conformity towards the Environment as well as our contribution towards
the Social conditions. * The company also exhibits additional certificates from Global G. A. P.
(standard for Good Agricultural Practice; Supplier Ethical Data Exchange (SEDEX)* as well
as certificate of the British Royal Consortium (BRC), a trade association for the UK Retail.
According to the company, showing these certificates is important aspect to position the
company as a reliable partner for its customers as it indicates proper measures have been put
in place, i. e. appropriate Environmental Impact Assessment, and that it has been approved by
authorities such as the Ethiopian Forest and Climate Change Commission (EFCCC).
Kanoria Africa Textiles (scoring 73%) highlights publicly the eco-friendly production of its
finished products. Certification from OEKO-TEX* as well as Cotton Made in Africa are shown
on the companys website in addition to certification from Carbon Initiative Improvement
4 https: /fehpea. org/code-of-practice/
5 The Ethiopian Horticulture Producer Exporters Association Code of Practice is the result of an initiative taken by the sector to
introduce a voluntary system of continuous professional and technical development, monitoring and self-regulation into the sector
and is designed to address market and civil society concerns about standards for social and environmental performance in the
sector and also to guide the sustainable development of the sector. See more at https: //ehpea. org/code-of-practice/
http: //agriberries. com/about-us/
8 https: //www. sedex. com/
7 https: /iwww. bregs. com/
 https: //www. oeko-tex. com/en/
9 https: //cottonmadeinafrica. org/en/standards-verification-system/
51
Initiative (CPI2)* for its sustainable water usage. New Wing Addis Shoes is displaying
certificate received from the local policy station showing the good community relation between
the company and the community. East Africa Bottling responded that the company regularly
shares its ESG activities through different media outlets. Pittards Ethiopia shares its different
social activities publicly on its website, highlighting the companys involvement in school
building as well as in supporting local charity organizations catering for disadvantaged young
people.
Interviewed companies have responded to actively applying multiple measures to increase
transparency and accountability in their respective companies. Measures such as full
compliance with Ethiopian labor laws, transparency in companys management style as well
as working closely with trade unions have been highlighted as important aspect to avoid
corruption and increase transparency (Figure 17). 50% of the responding companies see in
following a stablished anti-corruption policy, transparent process in giving and receiving
approvals and multilayer decision-making as useful ways in fostering transparency and anti-
corruption behavior and increase the companies code of ethic. For example, Agri Flora
emphasizes the good relation between management and employee unions to identify solutions
to problems associated with working on the farm, including creating a more transparent
decision-making process.
What anti-corruption practices are actively undertaken by your company?
Following established anti-corruption policy 9 | 9 |
Full compliance with the labour proclamation 15 I 3 1
Multi-layer decision making 9 | 9 |
Spot checks 8 I 10 |
Transparent process of receiving/giving licences &.. | 9 | 9 |
Working closely with trade unions 10 | 8 |
Transparency in company's management style 13 | 5 |
BEYes @No
Figure 17: Type of anti-corruption practice applied by interviewed companies
Interviewed companies have also indicated that they undertake regular audits in the financial,
social, environmental, water and energy areas. Companies have indicated to undertake
internal and external auditing process in one or more areas. 12 companies explicitly indicated
their financials are checked internally as well as externally. For example, in the past five years,
MNS Manufacturing received external financial audits by the Ethiopian Revenue Authority as
well as a quarterly audit by the Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) as the company received
https: //www. cpi2 org/en/
http: //www kanoria-africa. com/social-responsibility/
52 https: //newwing. com. hk/#mission
53 hitps: //www. pittards. com/about/community-partners/
52
a substantial financing from DBE when they started investing in the country. In addition, the
Business Social Compliance Initiative (BSCI) requires MNS Manufacturing to go through a
rigorous audit for environment and social standards. According to the company, these audits
have supported MNS Manufacturing to upgrade its activities in line with the requirements
received from the auditing institutions as well as national standards imposed by the host
government.
Economic Sustainability: Job Creation, Profits and Innovation and R&D
Under economic sustainability, the ability to companies to create jobs for local employees as
well as if companies are undertaking any innovation and R&D has been measured. Two
companies in the garment and textile sector, Kanoria Africa Textiles (83%) and Nuoya Textile
(67%) as well as two companies in the leather and leather products sector, New Wing Addis
Shoe (83%) and Pittards Ethiopia (50%), scored higher, highlighting that these companies are
investing in innovation and R&D. Interestingly, companies in the Horticulture and agro-
processing are scoring the least points for this indicator.
5.4.2 Social Sustainability
The category of Social sustainability scored by far the highest points compared with the other
two categories of Governance and Environmental sustainability. This may be in part due to
Ethiopias strong labor law, which has been revised in 2019 and seems to be adhered to by
case study companies. Sub-categories under Social include Employee Welfare and
Standards, Occupational Health & Safety, Training and Capacity-building, Equal
Opportunities, Product Safety, Consumer Relations and Local Community Betterment. Scores
per sub-category by case study company are included in Table 9 below.
53
Industrial sector SEE Sel er Equal Opportunities Product Safety ~~ Customer Relations TE Cm
Kanoria Textile 84% 97% 50% 50% 83% 100% 75%
MNS Garment  91% 97% 75% 75% 57% 58% 79%
ETUR Textile 99% 100% 75% 75% 33% 42% 75%
Nuoya Textile 84% 100% 0% 63% 13% 0% 58%
Anbessa Shoes 55% 47% 75% 75% 13% 67% 25%
Houdao Chen Tannery 63% 41% 25% 38% 47% 58% 63%
Zhang Jianxin Tannery 2ther & Leather 61% 24% 50% 38% 83% 58% 50%
New Wing Addis Shoes 54% 81% 100% 88% 97% 100% 92%
Pittards Ethiopia 72% 91% 100% 88% 27% 50% 79%
Agri Flora 73% 100% 75% 75% 57% 83% 50%
Flowerama 3 65% 63% 75% 88% 57% 100% 50%
Hansa Flower 58% 69% 75% 100% 57% 100% 83%
Joytech 96% 100% 75% 100% 100% 67% 71%
Ashraf Industrial 94% 44% 50% 75% 27% 100% 67%
Awash Wine Agro-processing, 99% 56% 75% 100% 40% 100% 88%
East African Bottling pire 4 99% 100% 75% 100% 100% 100% 75%
Richy Food products 74% 75% 50% 75% 100% 33% 50%
Metahara Sugar 88% 88% 75% 50% 27% 67% 75%
Employee Welfare & Standards
The sub-category goes beyond the labor law and labor standard by also including aspects on
a competitive salary and other benefits. In Ethiopia it is critical for companies operating in the
country to follow the labor law and ensure that employee welfare is met. The Ministry of Labor
and Social Affairs regularly checks companies if they are operating in line with Ethiopias Labor
Proclamation. As shown in Table 9 above, all companies give employee welfare due
attention, with companies in the garment and textile, agro-processing and horticulture sectors
scoring high scores. None of the companies scores below 50% of the total score. All 18
companies interviewed confirmed to strictly follow the countrys labor standards, by providing
written contracts to their employees, allowing for collective bargaining and paying overtime
based on 8h/day and 48h/week arrangement and providing severance payment. Having a
strong union is also seen as an advantage and companies such as Agri Flora, Etur Textile,
MNS Manufacturing and East Africa Bottling indicated to actively encourage employee
association to work closely with the companys management to help improve the overall
working conditions, especially on salary negotiation, welfare facility improvement as well as
community engagement.
54 https: //chilot. me/2019/10/labour-proclamation-no-1156-2019/
54
Which of the following policies/practices do you have in
place?
18.5
17.5
16.5
Written Collective Overtime Severance
employment ~~ Bargaining payment payments
contracts
Figure 18: Labor policies and standards applied by interviewed companies
In terms of welfare facilities for employees, companies interviewed highlighted to provide the
necessary facilities for their employees (Figure 19). For example, all interviewed companies
provide canteen, different toilets for female and male employees as well as sufficient waste
bins on their factory floors. Five companies (Joytech, Agri Flora, Etur Textile, Nuoya Textile
and East Africa Bottling) indicated to provide free food or subsidized canteen facilities to
employees. Although it is not mandatory to provide a dedicated canteen, companies operating
in Ethiopia see the provision of canteens as an advantage to increase efficiency of day-to-day
operations. In addition to canteens, 16 companies responded to provide safe and clean
drinking water to their employees. As transportation to and from work is a constant challenge
in Ethiopia and a major hurdle to companies efficiency, 13 companies indicated to provide
transportation services to their employees to tackle this challenge. Only eight (8) companies
provide recreation facilities to their employees.
55
18 Does your company offer adequate and priate
16 welf ciltiies for its worker
8
6
2 1
0 
QS NN -] oy >
& & Ni & &
SANG CNIS
($) <Q A >
ICA CH
& Rss &
 NN >
 of
Figure 19: Type of welfare facilities provided by interviewed companies
Salary
Ethiopia does not have a minimum salary. Therefore, companies usually follow industry wide
payment approaches or create their own calculation system to determine the minimum wage
at their respective company. For example, one of the interviewed companies (Etur Textile,
scoring 99% in employee welfare and standards) is using a fair remuneration quick scan
guide, which it accessed through its regular GRS/BSCI audit process. Based on this
approach the company takes the average salary compared to employees family size, then
considers if this could become a minimal living salary for its workers. For example, according
to the company, Etur Textile pays 1000 ETB for a cleaning person working at the company. All
18 companies say that they pay the same salary for female and male workers. 15 of them
indicated to employ female works on the factory floor. On the other hand, establishing a
minimum wage for sector specific tasks would help to align payment across different
companies within the same sector and help avoid the employee fluctuation.
https: //www. amfori. org/sites/default/files/Template%205%20Living%20Wage pdf
56
Minimum wage of selected companies (in ETB)
2500
2000
1500
1000
IB
 QO
 W & > 5 Nd
& & Qk <& PY  <&
 @ d o & it 
R  Ne  \ 5S 3
Y &  & S
( 0 X O >
 <  <2  x
& KS  RK) 2)
 X & 0
Figure 20: Minimum wage payment from selected companies
Half of the respondents say to hire their workforce on a permanent payroll with the intention to
keep them as employees for a longer period (Figure 21). Almost all companies interviewed
provide their employees opportunities for professional growth through regular on the job and
external trainings. They also offer scheduled annual salary increments and performance-based
promotions. Equally, eleven companies interviewed have highlighted to pay their employees
equal to, or more than, the local average salary for their respective roles in the company. Labor
intensive companies within the leather and agro-processing sectors are frequently using
temporary staff when there are peaks in workload. Pittards Ethiopia provides for annual salary
increments based on the annual earning of the company. Ashraf Industrial pays a minimum
net salary of 2,000 ETB and applies an annual promotion appraisal system as well as provides
its employees education allowance. Joytech pays a minimum of 1,820 ETB and additional
transportation allowance for its employees.
57
What percentage of the workforce is on permanent payroll?
(%)
120
100
100 100100100 1004100
80
60
 O SEES! NIE NZ:
@ FS & ENT RCA SE
<Q 78 SO N re & > oS oS & Si & py 5 & <&" a
< & SG SS LPS  EN I A I MP
. ) SPAN
8  o vO Cod o& oN & S NS & NCEE &
be Ra 5% & & 2 &
& a oN oN  &
 a8 & &
b's
Figure 21: % of workforce hired permanently by interviewed companies
Companies provide their staff members with additional benefits that go beyond salary payment
(Figure 22), including family health insurance, paid leave, maternity and paternity leave,
capacity development, severance pay and retirement policy. In addition, some companies
provide work-related allowance. For example, Hansa Flowers provides employees working in
the cold room, where flowers are kept fresh for export, a cold allowance of 300 ETB per
month. Awash Wine provides full education scholarship for its employees and considers itself
to be the pioneer in providing paternity leave, even before the law came into force. Flowerama
provides a career growth development for its employees allowing them to move up from daily
laborer to supervisory position. The company also provides on the job training by visiting other
flower farms. Joytech provides maternity leave for 4 months even though the law only
stipulates for 3 months.
58
What other benefits do you provide your employees?
Capacity Family/group Frequent Maternity Paid leave Paternity Retirement Severence
development health sensitisation leave (over (Over 16 leave policy pay
insurance on diversity, 120 working days/year)
inclusion, days)
well-being
mYes mNo
Figure 22: type of benefits provided by companies interviewed
Grievance System
Eleven of the interviewed companies indicated to have put in place a functioning grievance
management system (Figure 23). For example, Awash Wine has established a grievance
procedure unit to address any complaint concerning the wellbeing of the workers. At Hansa
Flowers, employees have established a committee to deal with grievance at workplace
including a gender committee led by women handling any sensitive harassment issues, should
they arise. East Africa Bottling confirmed to have a secure, anonymized mechanisms for
grievance expression, and redressal available to employees. Guidelines on how employees
can express their grievances are attached to the employees contracts. Moreover, the
company has put sealed boxes at its facilities to encourage employees express their grievance
secretly and it has also established a harassment prevention committee with periodic anti-
harassment sensitization program. At Joytech there is a dedicated box collecting comments
and the boxes are opened every month to be discussed with management and employees. On
the other hand, two companies from the leather sector have indicated that they do not have an
explicit system to express grievances or report harassment issues, these issues are mostly
dealt with by their human resource department.
Is there a secure, anonymised mechanisms for grievance expression?
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Figure 23: Number of companies having a secure and discrete mechanism for grievance
59
Occupational Health and Safety
This sub-category includes the following aspects: existing rules and procedures for workers,
available equipment, such as suitable personal protective equipment, emergency response
mechanisms as well as if there are dedicated personnel in the company dealing with health
and safety measures. Five companies scored full 100% for fulfilling OH&S. Four companies
scored below 50% (three in the leather and one in agro-processing sector) showing further
improvement is needed. Those scoring less than 50% indicated that although they have some
sorts of, more informal OH&S in place, they have not yet established adequate mechanism
due to shortage in manpower or lack of knowledge how such systems could be implemented
properly. Companies who have scored high scores indicated implementing appropriate OH&S
measures at workplace constitute an integral part of their day-to-day activity (see Figure 24)
Companies OHS Measures (yes response, per sector)
mAgro-Processing (4) m Garment & Textile (4) m Horticulture (4)
m Leather & Leather Products (5) m Sugar Sector (1)
5 5
3 3 4
4 4
4 4 4 4
Are all work- Are all workers Do you have Do you provide In case of work- Nominated H&S
related accidents aware of the agreed rules and adequate, suitable related injuries, is representative and
recorded, and OH&S rules? processes Personal the worker experts
mitigated? addressing all Protective adequately
relevant H&S Equipment (PPE), compensated?
aspects? including first aid
kits?
Figure 24: Companies OHS Measures
All interviewed companies have indicated that they provide adequate and suitable Personal
Protective Equipment (PPE) to their employees. For example, Flowerama has a dedicated
committee for health and safety issues at the company and it provides PPE to its employees,
such as gloves and masks for chemical sprayers.
Training and Capacity Building
Two companies from the leather sector (Pittards and New Wing Shoe) both scored 100% for
their regular training and capacity building programs. On the other hand, two companies
scored way below 50% as they have not yet established a regular training and capacity building
programme for their employees. On the hand, companies such as Anbessa Shoes have used
regular trainings to get their prospective employees identified.
Equal Opportunity
In assessing equal opportunity, this study looked at fair and transparent hiring practices as well
as at inclusive workplace management. Four companies from the agro-processing and
horticulture sector scored the highest points (100%). They have proper HR management in
place that allows inclusive and non-discriminatory hiring process. Especially women and
people with disability are given opportunity to work at these companies. In this category only
two companies from the leather industry are scoring below 50%.
Joytech: A sustainable and inclusive work place
A part of Ethiopia's horticulture sector since 2003, Joytech among the largest exporters of fresh
herbs, vegetables and flowers. The company is well versed in ESG practices given that its
European customers require a range of standards and practices in this regard. For example,
Joytech is pursuing a resource efficient hydroponics growing system and reuses fertilizer, which
overall also helps the company save up to 120,000 Ethiopian Birr per month. According to Joytech,
they were also the first horticulture company in Ethiopia to recruit hearing impaired workers, who
Joytech considers to be among the most efficient and reliable employees within the company.
Product Safety
Product safety measures how companies are undertaking their quality control to ensure
product safety and wellbeing of consumers as well as which methods they have put in place
to meet national and international standards. In this category three companies scored the
highest possible point of 100% (two from agro-processing and one from horticulture sector).
Although all companies interviewed indicated to have put product quality control system in
place (Figure 25), eight companies scored below 50% showing a room for improvement to set
up adequate quality control mechanisms in the textile, leather agro-processing sectors.
Interestingly, all companies from the horticulture sector scored above 50%. All companies in
the horticulture sector (4) do a daily quality check of product standards (i. e. checking proper
cutting stage for flowers) as only properly produced flowers will be sold to mostly export clients
through auctions or direct sales. Companies from the Garment and Textile sector, Leather &
Leather Products sector and Agro-Processing sector have indicated to have quality control
steps at every step of their production process.
61
Do you have a Quality Control division?
Frequently 6
Every production step
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
m Frequency of quality cpntrol of product m Quality Control division is available
products
Customer Relations
To ensure customer satisfaction companies need to address not just pre-sales but also after-
sales support and long-term commitments. Product quality as well as follow up support and
responses to customers is integral to long term sustainable growth of business. Customer
satisfaction measures how companies have put in place processes to provide products sales
and after sales services and if these services are in line with international standards.
Companies from garment and textile (one), from leather (one), from horticulture (two) and from
agro-processing sector (three) scored the highest possible scoring point of 100%. Two
companies from the garment and textile sector scored below 50% with one scoring the lowest
point possible for customer relation indicating that the company has not yet put in place
adequate customer relation services in place.
Local Community Betterment
Companies can have positive impact on local work force and economy. Ideally, all suppliers of
a company are local, but this is not always feasible since many raw materials may not be
available locally. Companies can buy as local as possible to grow the local economy, support
local businesses and reduce cost of transport (as well as emissions). It is also considered a
good practice if companies employ as many local workers as possible, if the right skills are
available, as this promotes the local economy. Companies can also undertake activities to
support local youth, such as internship or work placement programmes to empower them and
increase their skills and capabilities contributing directly to the local economic development. In
addition, through Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) is companies can initiate community
improvement projects and create community awareness.
All case study companies have active Corporate Social Responsibility programmes and
dedicated local improvement projects in their respective communities. For example Hansa
Flower (83% score) indicated to supply water to most sections of the Holeta City where the
62
company is located. In return, the community protects the farm when there is strife around the
farm. Through its periodic community conversation program  at least twice a month- Awash
Wine has been able to provide concrete betterment activities to the local community where it
operates its business. This includes provision of cookstoves for 200 households for free,
raising community awareness on waste disposal management as well as lobbying the regional
government to get electricity for the community. Zhang Jianxin Tannery (50%) and Houdao
Chen Tannery (63% score) contribute to the local community through money donation and
supporting of the local security forces. ETUR Textile has built a mosque and supports the
community by providing potable water and supporting an orphanage.
Community Engagement
18 16 16
Corporate Social Responisbility Undertaking community
programmes to benefit the local improvement projects
community
Figure 26: Number of companies with CSR activity
5.4.3 Environmental Sustainability
The assessment of the 18 case study companies against the draft ESG Framework showed
that environmental sustainability is the category against which companies performed the
weakest with in average across industrial sectors of only 34% of the maximum scores
achieved, in comparison to 49% in Governance and 72% in Social. However, the
Environmental category also has the largest differences between highest and lowest
performing case study companies by indicator, including energy, water, waste, pollution,
procurement, resource efficiency, climate action and ecosystem impact. While for each of the
indicators there is one or more case study companies that scored zero, there are also many
companies that scored 100% on some of the same indicators, e. g. water, waste, procurement,
resource efficiency and ecosystem impact (see Table 10 below). The one indicator that stands
out as the overall lowest ranking, with many companies scoring zero, is climate action. This
indicator is comprised of whether a company measures its carbon footprint, utilizes carbon
markets to access climate finance and has taken any actions to increase climate resilience of
63
its operations. The individual indicators are further explained and substantiate with more data
below.
sustainability
Resource Climate Ecosystem
Energy Water Waste Pollution pr ocureme POU'EME pesource Efficiency Climate Action Ecosystem Impact
Industrial sector Ener average Water average Waste average Pollution average ntaverage foo "
BY 8 8 8 8 nt 8 Efficiency average Action average Impact average
score score score score score
score score score
Kanoria Textile 40% 70% 67% 47% 45% 100% 17% 11%
MNS Garment 34% 30% 67% 2% 75% 100% 0% 11%
Ee Garment&Textle oo 38% oo. 43% oo 56% 37% oo 48% oo 100% oo 4% Jy 14%
Nuoya Textile 56% 40% 28% 33% 5% 100% 0% 11%
Anbessa Shoes 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 11%
Houdao Chen Tannery 0% 10% 22% 17% 30% 0% 0% 0%
Zhang amin Tannery Le3ther & Leather 0% 11% 0% 12% 23% 42% 17% 21% 5% 25% 0% 20% 0% 10% 0% 7%
New Wing Addis Shoes 21% 30% 34% 39% 40% 50% 0% 0%
Pittards Ethiopia 36% 20% 11% 31% 50% 50% 50% 22%
AgriFlora 0% 33% 50% 0% 0% 0% 0% 22%
Flowerama 0% 10% 25% 47% 17% 0% 0% 44%
a Horticulture er EB a EL 12%. 20% = 0% Pv DORE
Joytech 50% 100% 50% 0% 0% 0% 0% 44%
Ashraf Industrial 28% 10% 6% 0% 67% 100% 50% 100%
Awash Wine Pr 38% 20% 65% 8% 79% 100% 50% 100%
East African Bottling includingsugarand ~~ 53% 49% 50% 24% 55% 46% 8% 21% 100% 55% 100% 73% 0% 20% 100% 71%
Richy Food QE ECTEES [oars 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%
Metahara Sugar 53% 40% 4% 88% 31% 67% 25%% 56%
Energy: Energy Management Practices, Energy Efficiency, Renewable Energy and
Energy Management Systems
The energy demand of case study companies is predominantly met with electricity from the
national grid (84%) and through diesel to power generators and boilers (16%). Diesel
generators are commonly used as backup source for electricity generation in times of power
outages of the national grid. Companies reported varying frequencies and durations of such
power outages, ranging from a few short outages per year to frequent and extended outages.
The overall use of diesel generators to compensate for the power outages varies accordingly
and covers between a minor 2% (Awash Wine, Hansa Flowers, MNS Manufacturing, Etur
Textile, Nuoya Textile) all the way up to 50% (East Africa Bottling) of the individual companys
energy demand. Interestingly, many of the companies that are using diesel generators stated
that they are planning to invest in the installation of solar panels to reduce their dependency
on fossil fuels and limit their high energy costs (Etur Textile, New Wing Addis Shoes).
years to increase energy efficiency. This includes the replacement of old machines, the use of
energy recovery processes, such as heat recovery from boilers, and the use of energy efficient
controls, such as sensor switches, as shown in Figure 27 below.
64
Replacement of old machines
Use of energy recovery processes
0 10 19 29 38
Water: Water Management Practices and Water Efficiency
88% of the case study companies haven put in place measures in the last three years to reduce
their use of water. 58% of companies have increased the recycling of polluted water for reuse
in their operations. 41% of companies have increased their reuse of cooling water. 35% of
companies have increased rainwater harvesting and also 35% have switched their operations
to more water efficient technologies or processes. 29% of companies reduced their water
consumption through fixing of leakages or water losses (see Figure 28 below). For example,
MNS Manufacturing indicated to use steam efficiency technology for drying towels, reducing
water usage by 40%.
% of companies taking actions on reduction of water
usage
Recycling and reuse of water
Reuse of cooling water
Rainwater harvesting
Water efficient technologies & processes
Fixing of leakages and losses
0 15 30 45 60
Figure 28: % of companies taking actions on the reduction of water usage
sei Jianxin Tannery: Innovation in Resource Efficiency and Waste Management
The company is located in the city of Mojo, where a number of other leather tanneries are also
producing leather goods for local and international market. For more than one year, the company
was not able to take its solid waste material to the local dumpsite, due to the closure of the dumpsite
by the local authorities. Confronted with mounting waste material from the tannery, the company
came up with a new idea to establish a dog food manufacturing facility on its premise and utilize its
organic waste as an input for the dog food. The company has changed an immediate problem into
a product that will become an additional revenue stream once the factory is operational.
65
Waste: Waste Management Practices and Awareness-Raising, Non-Hazardous Waste
and Hazardous Waste
While some companies manage to use all of their raw materials, other companies, for example
in the leather and leather products industry have up to 50% of their raw materials going to
waste. Companies such as Zhang Jianxin Tannery are planning to use some part of the organic
waste as an input to the dog food factory the company is currently building within its premises.
In average 35% of the raw materials used by case study companies of the leather and leather
products industry ends up as waste. In the garment and textile industry this is only around 9%
according to responses from case study companies. However, all case study companies have
waste management systems in place and half of the companies regularly raise awareness and
provide employee training on waste management practices.
Kanoria Africa Textiles
The company has invested in sustainable production process to make its integrated denim plant
eco-friendly, helping it attract a number of additional customers. The company uses a state of the
art zero-liquid discharge wastewater treatment plant recirculating water, helping the company
reduce its water usage and associated cost substantially. Furthermore, the company converts its
solid/organic discharge to crystals and supplies the crystals to cement manufacturers and leather
tanneries as input. These dedicated sustainable activities helped the company in reducing waste
as well as in lowering its carbon footprint, enabling the company receiving a number of certifications
from leading international institutions attesting to its sustainable textile production methods.
Kanoria is also planning to invest in renewable energy sources to reduce its dependency on
electricity from the national grid.
Procurement: Raw Material, Packaging, Durability and Procurement Practices
In average case study companies procure about 29% of their supplies locally. This varies
significantly between industries with the leather and leather product industry having with 71%
the highest average of local procurement and horticulture with only 11% the lowest. Low
percentage of input for the agro-processing sector is due to unavailability of adequate local
inputs. For example, Ashraf Industrial indicated to import most of its inputs, including the raw
sunflower seeds. In addition, Awash Wine highlighted to have very limited local suppliers as it
imports majority of its inputs from Europe. In terms of sustainable procurement, 73% of the
responding companies ensure that their suppliers are certified in accordance with
sustainability-related standards.
66
Average local procurement of supplies in % of total
procurement of supplies by industry
Leather & leather products
Agro-processing, including sugar and sugar-related products
Garment & textile
0 20 40 60 80
Figure 29: Local procurement of supplies by industry
Climate Action: Carbon Footprint, Carbon Markets and Climate Resilience
Only one of the case study companies is conducting periodic calculations of its carbon footprint
(Pittards Ethiopia) and only one of the companies is participating in a carbon market scheme
(Awash Wine). Only about a quarter of the responding companies (28%) are concerned about
adverse impacts of climate change and have taken actions to increase the climate resilience
of their operations.
Ecosystems Impact: Biodiversity and Habitat
None of the case study companies considers its operation having any adverse impact on local
biodiversity. More than half of the companies (56%) state that they take active steps to prevent
the loss of biodiversity, e. g. through tree planting.
The company has established a dedicated department overseeing the recycling of resources
across all lines of production. Through its recycling practice the company transforms its grape
residue into organic fertilizer which is then used on the companys farms. Beside reducing cost for
fertilizer import this practice has also reduced the companys footprint on the environment.
5.5 Observations
+ Thanks to strong labor policies, there is deep understanding of social concerns. In
most companies, general labor standards were observed and adhered to, with many
companies going out of their way to support their employees. This was illustrated by
67
numerous examples; one company used parts of their land to grow fruits and vegetables
which the employees could take home, while others provided advantages like free meals.
Many industries saw themselves as central to the local socio-economic fabric, and thus
extended their support to the local community through efforts such as COVID-19 relief
packages.
Understanding of sustainability is limited, especially in domestic companies. As
described above, current operationalization of sustainability is heavily skewed towards
social elements as opposed to ESG as a whole. The experience of conducting the case
studies showed that it was difficult to reach a common understanding with the company
representatives on the topics covered in the case study questionnaire as there was little
institutional knowledge on sustainability, especially in domestic companies. One direct
illustration of this issue is the fact that some of the foreign companies had an appropriate
sustainability linked department or personnel who were well-versed with the industrial
performance and functions under the ESG topics. In comparison, the domestic companies
quite often lacked an equivalent department.
There are many examples of innovation and investment in sustainability, but they
are not curated. As many of these good practices were evolved organically to serve an
existing need (such as a leather company establishing a dogfood production factory on the
premises to process organic by-products or a horticulture company working towards
constructing wetlands in line with local needs for minimizing impact on environment), and
therefore often escape notice from a sustainability perspective. If these good practices are
not adequately captured in an ESG framework, this existing inclination towards innovation
might get disrupted in favor of compliance measures.
There is a clear gap between implementing sustainable practices and committing to
them. There is limited interest in committing to altruistic or supportive good practices from
a strategic point of view  while companies are willing and interested to support their
employees and the local community, they are reluctant to include such initiatives at a
planning stage as doing so would mean committing to carrying out these actions. There is
a preference for a more ad-hoc take on sustainable practices wherein no prior commitment
(and financial pledge) is made.
There is a general sense of reluctance towards public disclosures/transparency.
Transparency is a critical feature of ESG frameworks and indeed, one of the key
motivations for the same. In this context, there was a tendency to avoid sharing information
that is increasingly observed in the public domain (such as financial performance,
employment statistics, etc. ). While company spokespersons were willing to speak about
these indicators, they were reluctant to show any physical evidence.
68
5.6 Refinement of the ESG Framework
The initial draft ESG Framework has been refined through various iterations both on its
thematic scope and level of detail in the different thematic areas. The same accounts for
the detailed ESG Assessment Framework as contained in Annex V that was used for the
assessment of the case study companies. The Assessment Framework provides detailed
guidelines on delineating sustainable investment compliance requirements that need to be
fulfilled at the company level. The Assessment Framework allows for comparability across
industrial sectors, while at the same time taking into differences between sectors through
sector-specific scorecards. The scorecards were developed based on adjusted weightages
of scored for sustainability issues that are considered most important for the specific sector
(see Annex ll). The weightages were developed through an iterative process based on
feedback from Company performance assessment. The experience of the case studies
also provided insight to important aspects of interventions, which have been encapsulated
in this version of the report. Some key insights were:
e There needs to be greater focus on capacity development, particularly for
governance and environmental performance. The experience of conducting the case
studies showed that there is a need for hand-holding the companies on a number of
sustainability indicators. This may be due to two reasons: a. There is a lack of knowledge
on sustainability at the individual/respondent level and/or b. there is a lack of knowledge at
an institutional (company) level. In both cases, companies should be encouraged to
conduct capacity development programs so that the knowledge can cascade across the
organizational hierarchy. In a few instances (particularly for larger companies with foreign
investors) the presence of a dedicated sustainability department or personnel helped
ensure that at least some information related to ESG was being collected and maintained
internally. As this framework that intends to raise the sustainability ambitions of industries,
there is a need to encourage similar efforts towards data curation.
 Not all performance standards are equally matched. The ESG framework designed
under this project takes a detailed and comprehensive look at sustainability, with about 13
indicators covering about 60 sub-indicators across the three categories. While this is a
valuable endeavor to maintain a robust baseline, it is also important to take into
consideration the ability of the companies to adequately respond to the questions asked.
Based on our experience in conducting the 18 case studies, we have mapped the different
indicators on the ease of obtaining responses:
o GREEN - companies are able and willing to share this information adequately
o ORANGE - willingness and ability to respond varies
o RED - companies are either unwilling or unable to adequately share this
information
The result of this mapping is presented in the table below:
69
Table 11: Indicator mapping based on ease of obtaining responses
G.1. Sustainability
Commitment
G.1.1 Mission Statement
G.1.2 Corporate Policies
G.1.3. Management Systems
& Standards
G.2. Sustainability Expertise
G.2.1 Employee Training
G.2.2 Dedicated Experts &
Resources
G.3. Sustainability Practices
G.3.1 Supply Chain
G.3.2 Product Design
G.4. Transparency
G.4.1 Audits
G.4.2 Public Disclosure of Audits
G.5. Economy
G..5.2 Profits
G..5.1 Job Creation
G..5.3 Innovation & R&D
S.1.2 Child Labor &
Forced Labor
S.1.3 Salary
S.1.5 Grievance
System
S.2.3 Emergency
Response
Mechanisms
S.2.4 Dedicated
Personnel
S.1. Employee S.2. Occupational S.3. Training & | S.4. Equal Opportunities/Non-
Welfare And Health and Safety Capacity Discrimination
Standards S.2.1 Rules & Building S.4.1 Fair and Transparent
$1.1. General Labor | Procedures 5.3.1 Health & Hiring Practice
Standards S.2.2 Equipment Safety Training | S.4.2 Inclusive Workplace
S.5. Product Safety
S.5.1 Testing
S.5.2 Standards
S.6.1 Customer Satisfaction
S.7. Local Community
Betterment
S.7.1 Positive Impact on Local
S.7.2 Corporate Social
Responsibility?
% Primarily relevant for agro-processing and horticulture
57 Primarily relevant for export-oriented companies
% However, note that there are no dedicated/strategic CSR planning efforts except in floriculture due to supportive associations
70
E.1.1 Energy Management
Practices
E.1.4 Energy Management
E.2.1 Water Management 
Practices and Processes
E.3 Waste
E.3.1 Waste Management 
E.3.3 Hazardous Waste
E.3.4 Awareness Raising on
Waste Management Practices
E.7. Climate Resilience
E.7.1 Carbon Footprint &
Carbon Markets
E.8 Ecosystem Impacts
E8.1 Biodiversity
E8.2 Habitat?
This mapping highlights the need for greater comprehension and comfort on the side of
the company for many indicators (especially, as highlighted earlier, under G and E). One
solution could be to reduce the weightage of such indicators or remove them from the
assessment for the time being (as low ability to respond indicates a lack of legislative
push/support). However, this does not mean that such indicators should be removed
permanently as many of them are considered crucial for ESG assessments. Rather, the
aforementioned capacity building program, alongside any policy development in this area,
should take into account this varied understanding of sustainability and identify concrete
methods to overcome this issue.
The assessment questionnaire was cumbersome. A general feedback from the ground
was that the assessment questionnaire was quite lengthy, requiring about half a days
worth of time commitment from the companies who were more prepared to engage for an
hour-long discussion. There was also some concern regarding the overlap in the indicators,
as some high-level questions asked under G* have more specific indicators under S or E.
While it would be difficult to reduce the questionnaire to one-third of its original size, those
perceived overlaps in the questionnaire were reviewed and minimized.
59 Not counting the hydropower contribution to the grid
8 Contingent on local laws and sensitivity to land pollution
51 Especially relevant for textile and garment sector
52 Contingent on location in habitat-sensitive areas
71
 Good practices need to be captured and rewarded outside of the performance
standards. The case studies brought to light many interesting and innovative efforts
towards sustainability. Many of these good practices like COVID-19 relief packages or by-
product co-processing set a pioneering example for the sectors while others, such as
constructing wetlands, on-site farming or providing free lunch demonstrate how companies
can go out of their way to support their employees and their local environment and
community. These good practices should be inculcated beyond the boundaries of the
performance standards. In this regard, it would be important to provide a space within the
ambit of the framework to curate these examples at a sectoral and national level. Further,
incentivizing innovation alongside compliance will help ensure that companies are
motivated to institutionalize sustainability, and not just do the bare minimum to meet
requirements.
The framework presented in this report encapsulates the learnings from the case studies.
Additional details on how these lessons can be adequately implemented alongside the
framework are given in chapter 6.
72
6 Recommendations on operationalizing the framework
The ESG Framework for Ethiopia presented in this document is a result of research and
analyses of various similar frameworks across the world and is tailored by ESG and
sustainability experts for the Ethiopian context, with a particular focus on the garment & textile,
horticulture, leather and leather products, and agro-processing, including sugar related sectors
in the country. The framework, tested on a small section of the industry representatives, has
been received positively and has been modified/adapted over the past several months to make
it relevant and specific to the target sectors.
The experience from the ground shows a motivated, if inconsistent policy and practice
landscape, with encouraging examples of innovation and good practices. The aim of
implementing the framework then begins to hone these existent skills, while providing a
stronger foundation to industrial sustainability. Building on the observations presented in the
previous chapter, the following overarching recommendations can be provided:
73
STAKEHOLDER
FINANCING
Figure 30: Key aspects of framework operationalization
To provide a more action-oriented perspective, these recommendations have been
deepened into concrete next steps that can be applied to successfully operationalize the
6.1 Next steps
6.1.1 Institutional set-up to operationalize the ESG
 A National Steering Committee (NSC) comprising of representatives from key Ministries
and agencies, industries, academia, national and international sustainability experts should
74
be formed to oversee the planning of the framework in the coming years. The main
function of this committee would be:
[@]
Leading the work on policy formulation and amendments in line with the framework
requirements
Initiating necessary efforts towards institutionalizing the framework through a
dedicated national body (detailed below)
Overseeing formulation of capacity development curricula to be implemented
alongside the framework
Acting as an intermediary between the Governmental entities and industrial sector
in finalizing the framework elements.
Recommended time of operationalization: Year 1
We recommend the formation of a dedicated and empowered body (National Sustainable
Investments Body  NSIB) at the national level that can oversee the implementation of
the framework and act as an interface between the industries and the Government
agencies. The NSIB will be a distinct body from the NSC as the latter would have
supervisory powers over the former. Such a body can be housed within EIC, and partially
(if not fully) funded by a sustainable investments fee/tax or that can be levied on investors
(both foreign and domestic) with the aim of ensuring high quality standards. Support from
financing institutions could also be procured for funding this body or existing facilities, such
as the CRGE Facility under MoFEC, could be used to provide the initial funding to set up
the NSIB. Key responsibilities of the NSIB would be:
Executing the strategy document and its key tenets by preparing periodic
implementation plans, developing and signing contracts with relevant stakeholders
(particularly industries, industry associations and third-party auditors)
Designing and planning capacity building endeavors such as industries, along with
training of trainers sessions for auditors and personnel from associated Ministries
or Agencies.
Developing and implementing a certification process for certifying (i) trained
auditors and (ii) Companies successfully achieving their ESG targets on periodic
reviews
Implementing a stringent monitoring protocol by housing a neutral body of auditors
that govern the empaneled agencies/auditors. This would be a clean, transparent
body that holds all auditors responsible for the audits, and ensures fair, transparent,
and balanced audit reports.
Negotiating the terms of reference for incentives related to ESG performance
between Ministries and industries
Maintaining a record of performance on participating sectors and companies, and
releasing periodic reports which highlight the experiences, strengths, challenges
and good practices observed. This report should be shared with multilateral
agencies such as the SIP.
75
Develop guidelines for specific elements of framework implementation, as and
when required (such as the template and methodology for audits), to be followed
by all participants
Planning subsequent phases of framework implementation (pilot/voluntary
compliance phase, compliance driven development phase and competitive index
participation phase), based on previous experiences, including relevant
changes/course-corrections, as continuous improvement is the key to a strong ESG
Recommended time of operationalization: Year 2 (or 3)
6.1.2 Planning the framework implementation
 Athorough stakeholder mapping and analysis exercise should be conducted to understand
not only their interests in sustainable investments, but to also capture their perspectives on
sustainability and existing capacity. Some key stakeholders consider are:
Ministries and Agencies mandated to oversee investments in Ethiopia such as EIC
and MOTI as they will be tasked with the ownership of the framework
Ministries and Agencies mandated to protect environmental and social rights  such
as the MEFCCC and MOLSA as they can guide the framework implementation plan
Ethiopian Standards Agency, Ministry of Finance, National Bank of Ethiopia and/or
similar national-level bodies (including commissions, agencies, and specialized
entities) that can provide support to the framework
UNDP, SIP and other multilateral agencies with presence in Ethiopia and interest
in national sustainability endeavors
Industries and industry associations from the target sectors
Domestic and foreign investors operating in Ethiopia, to understand their approach
to sustainability and experience in other contexts
Non-governmental and civil society organizations entrenched in the area of
sustainable development who can share unbiased perspectives on the framework
implementation plan
The stakeholder mapping should first take into account the interests and influences of
the stakeholders, ideally through a simple matrix approach (see Figure 31). Secondly,
through one-on-one engagement, their understanding of sustainability (particularly in
the context of sustainable investments) should be discerned. This will help identify
sensitization and awareness raising needs within the stakeholder cohort.
% Recommended list of high-priority stakeholders is provided in Chapter 4, Section 4.3.2.
76
i * Tobe actively Key Players
i consulted and kept Drivers
: satisfied To be engaged
: regularly
w
QO:
=a
wi:
>:
oT : LOWINFLUENCE/LOW INTEREST
=:
Should be shown
consideration & kept
informed
INTEREST
Figure 31: A simple matrix approach to stakeholder mapping
On the basis of the stakeholder mapping, a series of consultations need to be planned with
high priority stakeholders, to develop the vision and plan for framework deployment. This
is necessary to strengthen the framework with adequate inputs from the stakeholders.
Important elements of the framework that should be discussed include:
oO 0 O Oo
Implementation plan for the pilot/voluntary compliance phase (targets, duration
process etc. ), along with a roadmap for subsequent phases (compliance driven
development and competitive index participation)
Monitoring and reporting protocols to be followed
Roles and responsibilities of key stakeholders
Incentives for participation (for industries and industry associations)
Financing mechanisms for implementing the framework
These consultations should be initiated and chaired by the NSC. Involvement of
industries and industry associations is extremely important at this stage as the first
stage of framework implementation is voluntary in nature.
The ESG assessment system (questionnaire) prepared for this project provides detailed
guidelines on areas that companies need to focus on, and how auditors can assess the
performance. To ease usage across third-party auditors, and to ensure that there is no
change or discrepancies, this assessment system should be automized and evolved into
an intuitive and user-friendly tool that can generate sector-specific questionnaires and save
responses into a central database (that can be housed with the NSIB). A full-fledged web
tool with dedicated dashboards for different users (companies, industry associations,
77
auditors, NSIB, Ministries) can also be considered as such a tool will ease the process of
self-audits and report generation.
Recommended time of operationalization: Year 2
6.1.3 Legislative and Policy support to boost ESG
Based on the stakeholder consultations, a strategy document should be written and
formalized to govern developments in sustainable investments. The aim of this document
should be to align ESG ambitions to existing national level strategies and legislation (such
as the CRGE, HGER etc. ) and outline the key actors, institutional mandates, roles and
responsibilities, financing mechanisms and a roadmap to be achieved. This document will
act as the foundation for the framework implementation, and thus should be prepared with
extensive involvement of all key stakeholders. The writing of this document should be
spearheaded by the NSC, with the NSIB being the custodians of its contents.
The legislative mapping presented in this report shows existing lacunae in policies with
regards to sustainable industrial practices. To take this work forward, amendments to
existing legislations (such as the Environmental Act, Industrial Development Policy,
Foreign Investment Policy, etc. ) or supportive legislations must be developed and
implemented before or alongside the framework implementation, in order to ensure that
there is a legislative/regulatory foundation to the requirements put forth by the framework,
especially from companies. This will be particularly important for some of the performance
standards under Governance and Environmental categories such as CSR investment,
transparency/public disclosure, climate resilience, water consumption and audits, etc.
6.1.4 Implementing the ESG framework
National
Once the strategy document is operationalized by NSIB, companies from selected sectors
should be invited to participate in the pilot phase (voluntary compliance) of the framework
implementation. Care needs to be taken to ensure that there is diversity among the
selected companies in terms of size, ownership, location, export-orientation, etc. Short-
term incentives should be made available for the participating companies. On selection,
companies will need to work with the industry association and the NSIB to define their
sustainability ambition. While certain compliance-linked targets will be set, companies
should also be encouraged to be innovative in their approach to sustainable practices.
Recommended time of operationalization: Year 3
An extensive set of capacity building curricula need to be developed in consultation with
one or more national training institute with the aim to introduce a holistic perspective to
sustainability. There is a wide group of stakeholders that will be directly or indirectly
78
affiliated with (or indeed, impacted by) this ESG framework. To ensure that all stakeholders
are well-versed on topics covered under the framework, and sustainability in general,
different capacity development programs will be required, such as:
o Half-day conclave on sustainable industries to introduce the concept of
sustainability and its relevance to Ethiopias development initiatives in general and
the industrial sector in specific  for Ministries and Agencies laterally associated
with the framework
o One-day workshop on sustainable investments for all key stakeholders identified
in the mapping exercise. This event will walk the participants through the framework
and its implementation plan to align all expectations
o Two-day introduction to the framework programs for companies and associations
in a sector, that will introduce the framework and its elements, and outline the steps
that need to be taken at company and sectoral level to meet the framework
requirements. This program will be targeted at the management level and should
include field visits to exemplary companies.
o Two -day training of trainers sessions aimed at the body of impartial auditors for
training third party auditors seeking empanelment
o Two (or three)-day certification program for third-party auditors that will detail out
the step by step process they need to conduct during the sustainability
assessments of companies
o Longer programs for company officers to understand the concept and elements of
sustainability and how to operationalize them. Unlike the other programs that can
be organized under NSIB, this certification-level course should be offered by
training institutes, and aim at building capacity of officers and engineers in
sustainability (i. e. make them sustainability officers)
Recommended time of operationalization: Year 2 onwards
Individuals or firms with experience in conducting sustainability audits can be empaneled
with the NSIB and be charged with conducting the periodic third-party audits required under
the framework. Empaneled auditors should be required to complete the certification
program highlighted above, with a refresher course being conducted periodically.
An extensive baselining exercise has been identified as the first step of the pilot phase.
The assessment system prepared for this project (and used for the case studies) can be
used as a basis for the baselining questionnaire. However, it should be kept in mind that
the intent of a baseline is not to assign value to current practices, but to capture the existing
reality. Thus, this exercise should try to capture deep, disaggregated data from
participating companies across all three E, S and G categories. Apart from speaking to
senior management, auditors conducting the baseline should prioritize field visits and one-
on-one interviews with employees.
79
The pilot phase of the framework beginning with the baselining exercise should be
implemented for a set cycle period (between, say, 2-5 years). Companies will be required
to pursue the targets set for them (whether they are common across the sector or oriented
to the company), with half-yearly self-audits and yearly third-party audits being conducted
through the cycle period.
Recommended time of operationalization: Year 4 onwards
Existing sectoral bodies, such as industry associations are critical entities in ensuring
successful implementation of sustainable investment practices. In this context, industry
associations should be involved in all planning discussions regarding the framework
implementation plan. They can also play an active role in ensuring effective uptake of the
framework by taking certain measures:
Given that the pilot phase will require mobilization of institutional, policy and financial
levers, industry associations can support these endeavors by introducing sectoral
standards sectoral standards in line with the ESG framework. These standards can be
evolved into performance standards under the framework over time, thus becoming a key
feature of the sector, and not an additional expectation. The existing standards in the
floriculture sector are a good example of this. Governance and Environmental standards,
in particular, will be an important area of implementation for these standards
Recommended time of operationalization: Year 1 (or 2)
Industry associations can also help drive innovations by supporting the NSIB in promoting
good practices in sustainability through periodic award systems wherein best performing
companies are publicly recognized
Recommended time of operationalization: Year 4
Industry associations can also partner with NSIB in capacity development by ensuring that
their members and management committee are appropriately trained.
Recommended time of operationalization: Year 3-4
Other industries can build on the successful example of the Ethiopian Horticulture
Producer Exporters Association: Code of Practice, which in itself is an ESG framework.
It provides the sector a voluntary system of continuous professional and technical
development, monitoring and self-regulation into the sector and is designed to address
market and civil society concerns about standards for social and environmental
performance in the sector and also to guide the sustainable development of the sector
https: //ehpea. org/code-of-practice
Company-level
Participating companies sit at the core of the framework and are instrumental to any efforts in
implementing sustainable industrial practices. In this context, they are highly important to all
aspects of the framework. At an individual level, companies can begin with familiarizing
themselves with the concept of sustainable industries, particularly with the ESG performance
standards. Whilst executing the requirements of the framework, companies can also
implement the following:
Planning for sustainability by making budgetary and strategic decisions in favor of
sustainable practices. This will include budgeting for a sustainability officer if not a
department, reviewing existing processes, protocols, policies and systems to ensure they
are up-to-date and efficient, setting internal targets E, S and G targets, etc.
Conducting periodic sensitization and capacity building on sustainability, through NSIB
approved curriculum for both staff and management
Recommended time of operationalization: Year 3 onwards
Preparing and submitting accurate, unbiased, and un-doctored half-yearly self-audit
reports on sustainability performance, focusing on both successes and areas of
improvement
A set of specific guidelines on good practices for companies was also developed under the
ambit of this project and is available in Annex IV.
81