0 Gs 777 ProAgro

Ey Organization
Establishing a Parent Stock
Management Centre and Feed
Processing Facility in Ethiopia
Business case
The ILO ProAgro Ethiopia Project
August 2022
On behalf of
Supported by
oY; Invest for Jobs 4 | Feder Ministy
4 Opportunities for Growth in Africa
for Economic Cooperation
and Development
 Contents
p> CONTENTS II
FIGURES III
TABLES III
ACRONYMS Vv
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1
1. INTRODUCTION 3
1.1. PROJECT INTRODUCTION 3
1.2. STUDY PURPOSE AND SCOPE 4
1.3. STUDY METHODS 5
1.4. REPORT STRUCTURE 6
2. THE LANDSCAPE OF THE POULTRY SECTOR 7
2.1 BACKGROUND 7
2.2 MARKET OVERVIEW 8
2.2.1 Demand for poultry products 8
2.2.2 Supply of poultry products 11
2.2.3 Competition 14
3. SETTING UP A PARENT STOCK MANAGEMENT AND FEED PROCESSING CENTRE 15
3.1 THE INVESTMENT PROPOSAL 15
3.2 TARGET MARKET 16
3.3 TECHNICAL STUDY: 17
3.3.1 Construction of the poultry centre 17
3.3.2 Machines and equipment 18
3.3.3 Sourcing of inputs for production 19
3.4 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AND STAFFING 21
3.5 COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS 22
3.6 ASSESSMENT OF RISKS 24
3.7 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 25
3.8 SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF THE INVESTMENT PROJECT 25
3.9 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT 26
4. THE PROSPECT OF SETTING UP A GRANDPARENT STOCK MANAGEMENT CENTRE 27
5. RECOMMENDATIONS 29
6. CONCLUSION 30
ANNEX 31
ANNEX 1: LIST OF STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATIONS INFORMING THIS REPORT 31
ANNEX 2: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE VALIDATION WORKSHOP 32
FIGURES
Figure 1: Growth Target for the POUILIY SECLON eo. vere cecreeteeeeseneteseeeseteseseen ses sesease sees 7
Figure 2: Per capita consumption of @ggS, 2079... reece ceereseteseseseneteseeesesessesenesssessesesssssees 8
Figure 3: Chicken population in Ethiopia, 2011 = 2020 (in 1,000 heads) .... ccceceveuereeeeerceeereeeeeecerenveeens 10
Figure 4: Import of DOCS iN ELNIOPI eee vteerueueeereeneeetree cece testeteese se ceaesetesesesesestssesenesesesesentsenesseneaens 12
Figure 5: Growth of import of poultry meat, ELhiopia.... c. ccceeeeeeeereneneneneeteeeeeeteeeeneeseeeeecseseseesenene 12
Figure 6: Potential composition of feed ingredients (Percentage)... ceeceveeereeeeereeeeseeeeeecereseeeens 19
Figure 7: Organizational structure of the POUILIY CONTI... eerie eeeeteeeeseeeeeees cs eeseeseaene 20
TABLES
Table 1: Production of poultry meat and eggs in Ethiopia, 2011 = 2020.... c. cccoveeeveerceeneeeeceeereeeereene 1"
Table 2: Investment cost of setting Up the POUILIY CONEIE weiner eeereeeeeseneneeeeeenesesesaeseene 14
Table 3: List of equipment for parent stock brooding Period... veeeeeceseeecneeeceeeneeeeeeceseeeenenene 17
Table 4: Proposed list of poultry feed processing Machines... veecreceseeecneeceereeeeeeceneeeeenene 18
Table 5: A high-level income statement of the proposed Project ccc ceecereeecreeeeeeeeneeeeeeerereeverenens 22
Table 6: Assessment of potential risk to the INVeStMENT Project wow eeecereeecreeeeeeeeeeeeeresereeeesenene 23
Table 7: High-level implementation Plan cece reece se seeeeseteeeseeeseeeeseseseseseeseneseesseseens 24
ACRONYMS
GOE
BMZ
ILO
FOREX
MSA
EIC
ATA
GDP
GTP
DOC
Government of Ethiopia
German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development
International Labour Organization
Foreign Currency
A Market System Analysis of the Poultry Sector, in Sidama and Amhara, Ethiopia
The Ethiopian Investment Commission
The Agricultural Transformation Agency
Gross Domestic Product
The Growth and Transformation Plan (I & II)
Day Old Chickens
Executive summary
Injune 2021, the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ) funded
ILO ProAgro Ethiopia project conducted a Market System Analyses (MSA) of the poultry sector. In
the report, in order to facilitate growth of the poultry sector, reducing the cost of poultry farming
was identified as one of the key intervention areas. Following that recommendation, the ILO in
consultation with the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) and other relevant stakeholders took on the
assignment of developing a business case to assess the efficacy and relevance for establishing
grandparent multiplication and feed processing facility in Ethiopia which could potentially lead to a
reduction in input costs for the poultry sector.
The business case study aims to provide key stakeholdersboth the government and potential
investorswith a data-driven analysis to improve binding constraints in the sector and present a call
to action.
Despite subsequent efforts by the Government of Ethiopia (GOE) and development partners, the
poultry sector in Ethiopia remains at its early stage. To stir growth of the sector, the GOE has set out
an ambitious target in its 10-year perspective plan, with a goal of doubling both eggs and chicken
meat production. This target could be achieved only if the binding constraints in the sector including
poor productivity of chicken breeds, short supply of day-old-chickens (DOCs) and shortage of feed,
are resolved. The underlying condition from where these challenges are born such as the shortage
of foreign currency (FOREX), lack of grandparent management farm and increasing cost of inputs for
feed production must be addressed.
Addressing these challenges starts with understanding the market potential of the poultry sector.
Ethiopia has one of the largest chicken populations in Africa but is lagging in per capita consumption
of eggs and chicken meatoften consuming two to 10-times lower than African peer countries.
However, the average low consumption trend in the country is an indication of the considerable
potential that the Ethiopian market holds. Urbanization, increasing income and the emerging
nutrition-conscious low middle-class communities in Ethiopia are expected to improve consumption
and significantly increase demand in the short-term. Suppliers of poultry products can reap the
economic benefits resulting from these changes. However, to realize these economic and social
gains, inputs such as DOCs and feed at affordable prices must be abundantly available.
At the back of this rationale, the business case for investing in establishing a parent stock
management and feed processing centre has been found to be a viable economic opportunity. This
study envisages setting up this poultry centre that would have the capacity to produce 15 million
DOCs and 40,000 tons of poultry feed annually. The total investment cost to establish the centre is
estimated to be USD 14.17 million and could be operational in 18 to 36 months. For both production
lines, inputs including parent stock, premix, etc. will need to be imported while other inputs such as
maize and soyabean will be sourced locally. Based on conservative estimates, a high-level cost-
benefit analysis projects that the centre will generate an internal rate of return (IRR) of 31 per cent
1 A Market Systems analysis of the Poultry Sector in Amhara and Sidama, Ethiopia, International Labour Organization,
2021
over seven years. The investment project will also create direct employment for over 400 people and
will have an immense social and economic impact in the country.
The centre or investment project could be explored in various forms including bringing an all-new
investment to establish the poultry sector, partner with existing feed producers and hatcheries or
exploring potential partnerships with cooperatives and unions. A staged approach could also be
explored where production could start in phases and would be scaled based on the market adoption.
The study importantly confirmed some of the initial findings of the MSA that the Ethiopian market is
currently not mature enough for setting up a grandparent multiplication centre. The demand for
eggs and poultry meat in Ethiopia is low and there is uncertainty about the capacity of the market to
absorb increased production of poultry products. Further, the investment risk of grandparent
multiplication centre is high due to poor biosecurity and lack of experienced human resources. Due
to these constraints, the business case for setting up grandparent multiplication centre in Ethiopia
is not there yet. However, with a long-term vision of realizing this goal, the GOE, along with the
private sector, can support development of the market, create a conducive policy framework and
assurance, and avail necessary infrastructure for investors looking to explore the opportunity. When
these major requirements are fulfilled, then the business case for establishing a grandparent
multiplication centre could become evident in five to seven years.
1. Introduction
1.1. Project introduction
The ProAgro Ethiopia project has been funded by the BMZ Special Initiative on Training and Job
Creation to support Ethiopia to develop its agro-industry potential and create more and better jobs.
To do this, the project puts forward an integrated strategy, combining policy support and social
dialogue, skills development, enterprise development and entrepreneurship training, with the
ultimate objective of creating decent job opportunities for women and young men in the selected
sub-sectors: fruit and vegetables, poultry, and edible oil. The project will develop the capacity of
national, regional, and local stakeholders to develop and implement policies aimed at boosting the
job creation potential of the agribusiness sector while enhancing decent work conditions.
ProAgro Ethiopia had conducted a Market System Analyses (MSA) for the poultry sectors in Ethiopia2.
The key finding of the analysis shows that imported exotic breeds are typically more productive (both
in meat and eggs) and rearing periods for imported breeds are about half that of indigenous breeds.
However, to import these parent stocks for DOCs multiplication in Ethiopia, companies need to wait
for a long queue to access foreign currency (FOREX). When FOREX becomes available, there usually
is an oversupply of DOCs in the market, which exacerbates inconsistency of supply. In addition,
import of parent stock is associated with high mortality rate during transportation, which increases
cost of operation.
In addition, an analysis conducted by the Ethiopia Investment Commission (EIC) and the Agricultural
Transformation Agency (ATA) indicated that having a grandparent stock multiplication centre within
Ethiopia would reduce the DOC price by 55 per cent 3 by reducing mortality rate of DOCs during
transit from abroad and the demand for forex to import parent stocks. This could eventually increase
domestic demand for chicken meat and eggs, leading to a positive change in the average
consumption patterns of the Ethiopian population and hence enhance opportunities for the export
market, which would in turn make the multiplication centre more sustainable.
Against this backdrop, the ILO ProAgro Ethiopia Project has commissioned the development of a
business case for investing in the poultry sector in Ethiopia, specifically establishing a grandparent
multiplication centre and feed processing, and provide the government with evidence-based data
and analysis, thereby supporting development of the poultry sector and addressing the major
bottlenecks that limit its potential.
During the initial phases of this study, it was understood that introducing a grandparent
multiplication centre in Ethiopia would first require fulfilling many important prerequisites from the
government, investors, and the market itselfwhich are currently not in place. Consequently, the
focus of the business case was shifted to establishing a parent stock management centre. However,
the business case will also provide insights on the foundational work that is needed to establish
grandparent management centre in the long term.
2 A Market Systems analysis of the Poultry Sector... Ethiopia, International Labour Organization, 2021
3 Food and Beverages Processing and Auxiliary Industry Strategy, EIC, 2020.
1.2. Study purpose and scope
Several value chain assessment reports conducted on the poultry sector in Ethiopia have identified
lack of grandparent multiplication centres and adequate supply of feed as the main bottlenecks to
poultry production growth4. Based on this premise, this business case report sets out to show the
critical pieces that need to come together to make setting up a parent stock management centre a
viable investment opportunity. Meeting the demands of such kind of venture requires an active and
coordinated participation of policymakers, regulators, and the private sector. Hence, the business
case study endeavours to provide a data-driven insight on the potential of the sector and whet the
appetite of stakeholdersboth public and privateto take the necessary steps towards realizing the
goal of setting up a large-scale parent stock management centre soon.
The business case study assesses various aspects of setting up a parent stock management centre
in Ethiopia. These include the policy and regulatory frameworks, the market potential, the technical
requirements, financial viability, and the socio-economic impact of the investment project. The scope
of the business case study includes:
1. Policy and Regulatory Framework: Providing a review of key policies and strategies, planned
and ongoing, that affect development of the poultry sector, with a view of their impact on the
investment project itself
2. The Market Potential: Assessing both domestic and export market potentials including
describing the key cross-border trade agreements that Ethiopia benefits from and presenting
unique value to investors. In addition, the study will analyze local competition and identify key
success factors. Risks related to market and project implementation and their potential
mitigation strategies are identified
3. Technical Assessment: This exercise includes:
 Describe the type, scale and business model of the feed processing and parent stock
management centre, drawing lessons from African countries that have built efficient and
sustainable parent stock centres
- Defining the organizational structure, governance model and staffing needs for the
proposed venture, including identifying the technical skills needed to successfully
establish and operate the venture
 Identifying the technical needs (e. g. , construction, machinery, equipment, systems, etc. )
of setting up a full-scale parent stock management centre, including estimating the cost
of capital expenditure, inputs for production and working capital
 Designing an implementation plan, considering the various licensing and regulatory
processes related to setting up such kind of venture, sourcing of capital goods, identifying
and hiring human resources, etc.
4 Ethiopia's Food and Beverages Processing and Auxiliary Industry Strategy, ATA, 2021
4. Financial Viability: Developing a full financial model including income statement, balance
sheet, cash flow statement, scenario analysis, etc. , to assess financial viability of the investment
project and employing profitability ratios to determine return on investment.
5. Socio-economic Impact: The study provides a high-level analysis of the socio-economic benefits
and impact of investing in a parent stock management and feed processing facility.
Based on the above scope, the study provides evidence-based analyses and showcases what is
required to set up the intended project. While the report reflects the current thinking of stakeholders,
sufficient efforts are made to provide forward-looking recommendations, in recognition of the goal
of the government and potential shift in consumption of poultry.
1.3. Study methods
The business case was developed using a three-pronged approach.
1.
Desk review: Both qualitative and quantitative data was gathered through literature
reviews. These included national development plans of Ethiopia, value chain assessment
reports as well as research and analyses on the sector conducted by development partners
and researchers. Further, the desk research included reviewing examples of other countries
in Africa that have passed through a similar growth trajectory to draw lessons and best
practices.
Targeted interviews: Primary research was conducted in Addis Ababa, Bahir Dar, Sendafa
and Hawassa in March 2022. Interviews were carried out with a diverse pool of participants
including government officials, producer associations, commercial farms, smallholder farms,
researchers and potential investors. During this phase, over 25 businesses and organizations
were interviewed. The interviews provided a deep insight into the business case for setting
up the envisioned project.
Consumers survey: To complement the interviews, over 150 consumers and retailers were
surveyed to gather and analyze data about demand drivers, consumers behaviours, and
market trends. The analysis provided the inputs needed to determine the market size for the
sector.
What is a Business Case?
A business case provides justification for undertaking a project. It evaluates the benefit, cost
and risk of alternative options and provides a rationale for the preferred solution.
From Association of Project Manager (APM) definition
https: //www. apm. org. uk/resources/what-is-project-management/what-is-a-business-case/
The findings of this study were validated in a workshop organized on 14 July 2022 attended by ILO
tripartite partners and relevant public and private sector representatives. At the workshop, over 30
participants discussed the findings and recommendations and provided their feedback, which have
been incorporated in the final revision of this report (list of participants Annex 2).
1.4. Report structure
The report first provides a background on policy directions for the poultry sector. It then looks at the
business case from the marketboth demand and supply perspective. This is followed by a detailed
assessment of the investment proposal (Section 3). Finally, the report describes the foundational
work that needs to be explored to set up grandparent management centre in the long term (Section
4).
2. The Landscape of the Poultry Sector
2.1 Background
The agriculture sector is one of the major pillars of the Ethiopian economy. Due to the vast
agronomically favourable land and high number of livestock in Ethiopia, the sector has been
consistently driving the broader economic growth. Agriculture is the major employer in Ethiopia
with over 80 per cent of the population relying on agricultural development. The sector contributes
an average of 33 per cent to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Ethiopia and has grown by 5.3 per
cent annually since 20105.
Since the early 2000s, the government has introduced several policies and strategies to stir and
maintain growth of agriculture. The agriculture-led industrialization agenda has helped to generate
the fiscal, monetary, and human capital required for the ambitious infrastructural investment that
Ethiopia has taken under the consecutive Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP I & II). The
development gains from the sector have aided in uplifting domestic incomes, and thus helping to
strengthen domestic demand.
Despite this achievement, the agriculture sector has been lagging compared to the growth of the
industry and services sectors. The GDP of Ethiopia was estimated to have grown by an average 8.7
per cent in the GTP II period, placing Ethiopia as one of the fastest growing economies globally6.
However, average growth of the agriculture sector was 4.1 per cent, and only 50 per cent of the
target were achieved. Within agriculture, the livestock sub-sector growth is further behindonly 3.5
per cent average growth was exhibited during the implementation of GTP I and GTP IL.
Specifically, poultry production has remained at an early stage, despite its potential to raise the
incomes of farmers. 90 per cent of Ethiopian chickens are indigenous breedswhich indicates low
productivity and high mortality rates. This problem, combined with the high cost of feed, have made
the sector largely uncompetitive, domestic-oriented and focused on only egg production. The
potential of the sector to improve income, satisfy food and nutritional needs, create jobs, and play a
catalytic role in the country's economic development remains untapped.
To remedy the lagging growth of the livestock sector, the 10-year Perspective Development Plan
(2021 - 2030) has set out to 1) increase productivity of the livestock sector by improving breeds,
feeding and healthcare, and thereby 2) meeting the demand for industrial inputs, increasing export
earnings, and making greater contribution to the overall economic growth7. During implementation
of the plan, it is targeted to increase the contribution of the livestock sector to overall agricultural
production from 28 per cent to 38 per cent.
5 The 10-Year Perspective Plan, Ethiopia Planning and Development Commission, 2021
e The Agriculture Sector 10-year Development Plan, Ministry of Agriculture, 2021
7 ibid.
Particularly, improving the output of the poultry
sector has been identified as a priority. The plan
targets to increase egg production from the pggEess Production, Chicken Meat Production,
current estimate of 2.8 billion pieces to 5.5 billion Milfion pieces Thousand Tones
pieces by 2030 and chicken meat production
from 48 thousand tons to 106 thousand tons.
Figure 1: Growth Target for the Poultry Sector
+96%
Given the nutritional value of both chicken meat
and eggs, production growth is expected to
enable Ethiopia to meet its growing population's
demand, and even produce a surplus for 2021 2030 2021 2030
industrial use and/or export.
In addition, the poultry sector has an immense potential to create job opportunities, especially to
women and the youth. Relative to other sectors, poultry farming requires a low amount of capital to
start, and with the right training, can be well managed by farmers. The sector is marked as one that
has the potential to increase income for farmers, thereby improving their livelihoods.
Achieving the targets set in the 10-year plan calls for improvements in available chicken breeds,
access to input for poultry farming, access to finance and adoption of best practices in farming. To
bring about the desired sectoral transformation, the key levers have been identified as 1) increasing
production of day-old-chickens (DOCs), and 2) increasing feed production and supply. To this effect,
the government has set a goal to establish one national and four regional grandparent stock
multiplication farms, increase production of maize and soya bean and make significant investment
in feed producing facilities'. Fiscal and non-fiscal incentives are offered by the government to
encourage investments in the sector. These include duty-free exemption for capital goods,
construction materials, laboratory equipment and spare parts, and income tax exemptions. Overall,
there is a need for significant public and private investment to address the gaps in production and
distribution of quality input i. e. , DOCs and feed, to boost growth of the poultry sector.
2.2 Market overview
2.2.1 Demand for poultry products
Ethiopia has been experiencing tremendous demographic and social changes that have increased
demand for poultry products. The Ethiopian population has almost doubled to 115 million since the
turn of the millennium". The country is still predominantly a rural country with only 20 per cent of
people living in urban areas. However, the Central Statistics Agency (CSA) estimates that the urban
population will double to 42.3 million by 2037. " In urban areas, a health-conscious middle-class
community is also emerging, which has increased demand for nutrition-rich foods. Further, driven
by increasing tourism and changes in lifestyle, the restaurant and hospitality sector are increasingly
8 The Agriculture Sector 10-year Development Plan, Ministry of Agriculture, 2021
? A Market Systems analysis of the Poultry Sector... Ethiopia, International Labour Organization, 2021
10 Ethiopia livestock master plan (2015-2020), Ministry of Agriculture, 2015
11 World Bank Data, 2020
12Why Should Ethiopians Care about Urbanization? , World Bank, 2019
catering to diverse poultry-based dishes. In addition, local and international brands specializing in
chicken meat (e. g. , Pizza Hut, KKFC, In-Joy, etc. ) are gaining popularity among the growing young
population. These developments are contributing to an expanding poultry sector in Ethiopia.
In urban households, eggs and chicken meat are becoming part of the normal diet. In a recent survey
conducted in February 2022", it was observed that 98 per cent and 40 per cent of households in
urban cities frequently consume eggs and chicken meat, respectively. However, frequency of
consumption for eggs is higher compared to chicken meat. During the survey, 96 per cent of
participants indicated that they purchase eggs all year round, while the case was the same for chicken
meat with only 40 per cent of participants.
Despite some progress, per capita consumption of eggs Figure 2: Per capita consumption of eggs, 2019
and chicken meat is still low in Ethiopia. In 2019, the per
capita consumption of eggs in Ethiopia was estimated to
be 0.38 kg, which lags behind its East African peers. For ~~ Senegal
example, consumption of eggs in Kenya, Sudan and Kenya
Tanzania are 4-times, 3.6-times, and 2.7-times higher
than Ethiopia, respectively. Similarly, consumption in
Ethiopia, compared to the African (2.18 kg) and global
average (10.03 kg) is five-times and 26-times lower. Tanzania
Africa
IN
[NY
1.96
Sudan
Ghana
Ethiopia is ranked among the lowest consumers of eggs
globally at 155% out of 161 countries. The countries with
the highest per capita consumption of eggs in Africa
include Algeria (7.16 kg), Tunisia (7.15 kg) and South Ethiopia
Africa (5.77 kg).
i
Uganda
Rwanda
Id
'S
Ww
While the Ethiopia's overall eggs consumption is low, the case is relatively improving in the main
urban areas. For example, residents in the capital, Addis Ababa, are estimated to consume an
average 3.5 kg of eggs annually, which is 10-times higher than the countrys average. Urban cities
are the main market outlet for backyard, small-scale and commercial poultry producers due to higher
purchasing power and nutrition-consciousness of urban residents. Hence, although still below the
FAO recommended intake of 4.5 kg per year, consumption of eggs is significantly higher in urban
areas compared to the rural population.
Likewise, per capita consumption of chicken meat in Ethiopia is one of the lowest in the world. In
2019, the country ranked at 159 place out of 161 countries with an annual consumption of 0.69 kg,
only better than Chad and Burundi'. African peers such as Kenya, Sudan, Rwanda and Uganda
consume two-times or more poultry meat compared to Ethiopiaindicating the poultry meat market
in Ethiopia is still at an infant stage.
13 Invest in the Ethiopian Poultry Sector, ENTAG, 2020
1 The survey included 150 households in Addis Ababa
15 Consumption of eggs, FAO Stat/Helgi Library, 2019
16 1LO survey in February 2022
17 Consumption of poultry meat, FAO Stat/Helgi Library, 2019
Consumption of poultry meat is heavily affected by religious practices like fasting. Orthodox
Christians, the dominant religion practiced in Ethiopia, has some 250 fasting days during the year,
about 180 considered obligatory'. During this period, many members abstain from consuming eggs
and poultry meat, as a result, demand falls significantly. This affects market consistency and
contributes to the low per capita consumption in the country. On the contrary, at the end of the
fasting period, which is usually followed by religious holidays, demand for eggs and chicken meat
reaches its peakand often results in price hikes and shortage of supply.
In terms of preference, many Ethiopians opt for procuring live chicken and slaughter themselves.
During interviews, consumers have indicated that buying live chicken gives them peace of mind
they need not worry about when the chicken was slaughtered, how it was slaughtered, whether it is
organic or not, etc. This consumption preference presents high-risk of biosecurity for producers and
has been deterring commercial processing of chicken meat.
Per capita is also affected by a single-use approach to consuming chicken meat in Ethiopia. Chicken
meat is mainly used to make chicken sauce (doro wot), and making this dish is costly and time
takingthus it is not a dish made frequently. As a result, this lack of diversity in making chicken-
based dishes affects demand for poultry meat.
Clearly, Ethiopia is yet to make poultry meat consumption an integral part of the normal diet, as the
case is in other developing countries in Africa. For example, West African countries such as Senegal
and Ghana have a poultry meat per capita consumption of 7 kg or above, which is 10-times higher
than Ethiopia. Unlike Ethiopia, chicken meat is used in diversified cuisines like street foods, fried
chicken, roasted chicken, etc. in these countries.
However, the average low per capita consumption of eggs and poultry meat is also an indication of
the considerable potential for growth that the Ethiopian market holds. Poultry is one of the most
affordable nutritious foods and many families in Ethiopia are becoming aware about its impact on
health and reducing malnutrition in children. In addition, several initiatives are underway to create
demandboth led by the government and development organizations?. The impact of these
initiatives, coupled with increasing awareness and growing purchasing power, is expected to
increase demand for eggs and poultry meat.
To satisfy the potential demand growth for eggs and poultry meat, small-scale and commercial farms
need to increase their supply. However, farmers can only increase supply if equipment and inputs
such as feed, supplements and vaccines are available. Poultry farmers are constantly raising
concerns about affordability, availability, and quality of these inputs, especially feed. Because feed
constitutes up to 60-70 per cent of the cost of poultry production, its quality and availability directly
affects the performance of farmers. In addition, quality feed has the potential to increase carcass
yield and eggs production, hence, affects profitability of poultry farming.
18 Fasts & Feasts in the Ethiopian Orthodox Tradition. Southworld, 2021 (https: //www. southworld. net/fasts-feasts-
in-the-ethiopian-orthodox-tradition)
19 Consumption of poultry meat, FAO Stat/Helgi Library, 2019
20 Few initiatives include Agricultural Growth Program (AGP), The African Poultry Multiplication Initiative, African
Chicken Genetic Gain (ACGG), Livestock and Fisheries Sector Development Project and Urban food markets in Africa:
Incentivizing food safety using a pull push approach.
10
The demandsupply gap for poultry feed in Ethiopia is widening. In 2015, the demand for poultry
feed in the country was estimated to be over 120,000 tons, with a transaction value of over USD 157
million? '. In 2020, demand was projected to reach over 250,000 tons, while supply would remain
below 100,000 tons?2. The unmet demand for poultry meat is expected to be addressed by increasing
local production.
In addition to local supply, Ethiopia has a strategic locational advantage to compete internationally.
Ethiopia is centrally located in the global economy and has proximity to the key markets of Africa,
Middle East, and Europe. The East and North African markets alone are estimated to be valued over
USD 3 billion, and are largely import-dependent, and growing. Ethiopia is a member of the Common
Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) with preferential access to regional market of over
400 million people. In addition, the country has accepted to join African Continental Free Trade Area
(AfCFTA), an agreement that will allow free market access in the continent. Further, Ethiopian Airlines,
the largest carrier in Africa, makes Ethiopia a strategic location to establish businesses and serve the
greater African market. Ethiopian currently serves a network of over 125 passenger and 44 freighter
destinations. It connects Ethiopia to 57 destinations in Africa, providing ease of access to African
markets. Ethiopian currently is the main carrier to import frozen chicken and DOCs to Ethiopia and
would be a key partner for investors looking to produce and export poultry products.
With the right product and strategy, Ethiopia-based producers can effectively compete in this
growing African and international market and become an alternative sourcing hub.
2.2.2 Supply of poultry products
Ethiopia has the largest livestock population in Africa with a record of more than 200 million. In
2020, the chicken population was estimated to reach 56.8 million. Over the past 10 years, growth of
the chicken population has been stagnant, with an average year-on-year growth of 3 per cent.
Growth has been limited due to high mortality rate of chickens. In 2019/20 alone, over 39 million
deaths were recorded. Low adaptation of exotic breeds, diseases, and predators prevalent in the
scavenging production systems are the major causes of death of chickens.
21 Review on Compound Animal Feed Processing in Ethiopia... , Demissie Negash, 2017
(https: //www. avensonline. org/wp-content/uploads/JNH-2469-4185-03-0030. pdf)
22 Opportunity to invest in a compound animal feed ... , ATA, 2016
2d.
24 frequently asked questions Stat, 2022
25 Agricultural Sample Survey, Ethiopian Central Statistics Agency, 2021
11
Figure 3: Chicken population in Ethiopia, 2011 - 2020 (in 1,000 heads)
70,000
60,506 59.495 59,420
60,000 56,867
50,377 51,350
56,056 56,993
50,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
0
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
The poultry sector in Ethiopia is largely dominated by backyard production systems, which accounts
for 89 per cent of total chicken population. Although indigenous breeds are dominant, constituting
around 79 per cent of the chicken population, the number of exotic and hybrid chickens is rising
increasing from 3 per cent in 2016 to 12 per cent in 2021%. The Oromia and Amhara regions account
for 70 per cent of the poultry population in Ethiopia.
Poultry production in Ethiopia is dominated by layer breads (35 per cent of the total poultry
population). Farmersincluding small, medium, and commercialperceive the poultry meat market
as uncertain and risky, hence, rear low stock of broilers. During interviews the ILO conducted,
producers have indicated that the market for eggs is more stable compared to poultry meat. Further,
because eggs have longer shelf life and do not need refrigeration, investing in layers is considered
economically viable than broilers.
Bovans and Lohmann Brown are the most preferred layer chickens for commercial use while Kobb
500, Ross 308 and Habbard are preferred for broiler production. Sasso, a hybrid breed, is also
popular among farms that are looking for dual-purposed chickens. In fact, due to their higher
survival rate and less dependency on commercial feed, the Sasso are the dominant exotic breeds in
the rural community. However, the productivity of Sasso is lower compared to other exotic breeds.
Over the past decade, production of poultry meat has remained relatively constant in Ethiopia.
Production peaked in 2015 when it reached 73,272 tons and dipped in 2019 with production volume
of 58,477 tons. The low-level growth is an indication of the poor poultry meat consumption culture
in the country that has prevailed during the period. In addition, several challenges hindering the
growth of poultry meat production have remained unresolved, limiting growth of production. To
complement the limited local supply, chicken meat is imported in Ethiopiaalthough the value is not
significant.
26 Empowering Smallholder Poultry Production, Precise Consult, 2022
27 Agricultural Sample Survey, Ethiopian Central Statistics Agency, 2021
28 frequently asked questions Stat, 2022
29 Between 2015 and 2020, the total value of imported chicken meat was just over USD 2 million. However, if FOREX
was available, import of poultry meat would have likely increased.
12
Table 1: Production of poultry meat and eggs in Ethiopia, 2011 - 2020%
Poultry Meat Production Egg Production
(Tones) (1,000 pieces)
2011 53,920 900,000
2012 60,480 909,000
2013 61,840 932,000
2014 68,809 967,000
2015 73,272 1,208,000
2016 71,931 1,187,000
2017 67,498 1,196,000
2018 71,261 1,130,650
2019 58,477 1,179,957
2020 67,803 1,105,978
Although growth is slow, the volume of production of eggs has shown progress over the past decade.
In 2020, production reached 1.1 billion pieces of eggs, which compared to 2011, is 20 per cent
higher32. However, the average year-on-year growth was insignificant, except for a 25 per cent jump
in 2016.
One of the challenges in the Ethiopian poultry sector is lack of Figure 4: import of DOCs in Ethiopia
parent stocks. Because there is no grandparent multiplication
centre in Ethiopia, commercial farms depend on periodically
imported parent stocks. In the past three years alone, 1.3 million
DOCs were imported. However, the trend shows that imports
. 572,058
of parent stocks have declined due to lack of FOREX and 386,637
disruption of flights from Europe following the spread of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Discussions with commercial farms have
revealed that during the pandemic, some were forced to discard 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21
DOCs due to reduced demand for poultry products in the hospitality sector.
378,223
The poultry sector has several challengeseach having significant disrupting power. Lack of FOREX
is one of such challenges. Supply of machinery, premix and parent stocks rely on imports. As a result,
when FOREX is scarce, supply of poultry feed, DOCs and medicines is affected. Shortage of imported
premix, combined with increasing cost of other feed inputs (e. g. , maize, soya, etc. ) increases cost of
feed production, which is ultimately transferred to poultry farmers. In addition, brokers in the market
distort prices as well as buy and forward-sell feed and DOCs at higher prices to farmers. There are
also other financial barriers to improve eggs production including access to finance to increase layer
and broiler stock. The combined negative effect of these challenges is huge, and in some instances
have led poultry farms into bankruptcy. For example, in February 2022, it was reported that 15 to 20
30 FAO Stat, 2022
31 Other resources such as the Ethiopian Ministry of Agriculture indicate eggs production is double the amount
indicated by FAQ.
52 frequently asked questions Stat
33 Data collected from Ministry of Agriculture, 2022. The majority are believed to be parent stocks imported for
production of DOCs.
13
poultry farms were closed due to increasing cost of inputs. Political instability, especially in the
Northern part of the country, had contributed to price surge of maize and soyabean, which led to
huge increase in price of feed.
Figure 5: Growth of import of poultry meat, Ethiopia
Shortage of feed in the market is also leading to
importing. The Netherlands and Belgium are the top BEE
two countries from which Ethiopia imports feed. Over ad
the past five years (2016 - 2020), an aggregate USD 40% A
22 million was spent to import animal feed in 0%
Ethiopia. In 2020, import value reached an all-time 4000 a Pl
high of USD 7.1 million, increasing by 43 per cent 3000 
from 2019, which indicates the inability of local 2000
producers to meet demandoffering import- 1,000
substitution opportunities for new investors. -
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2.2.3 Competition
Currently, there is limited competition in the DOC and poultry feed markets in Ethiopia. Existing
commercial poultry farms have established a stable distribution channel, as a result, there tends to
be little to no competition under normal market conditions. However, there are instances when
supply surpasses demand. These might include when long-queued FOREX is released and
commercial farms import long-awaited parent stock, during fasting season or when unexpected
factors like COVID-19 affects demand. In such instances, producers get into a price war to offload
their DOCs in the market.
Likewise, demand for poultry feed currently exceeds supply, hence, competition is low. Although
more than 175 companies are registered in Ethiopia to produce animal feed, only 46 per cent are
believed to be operational, and most are producing under capacity. Alema Koudjis PLC, one of the
largest commercial poultry feed producers in Ethiopia, widely known for its high-quality feed
products, reportedly has the capacity to produce 12,000 tons of poultry feed per year, although
attaining that capacity has been difficult due to market instability. As the poultry market develops,
demand from poultry farms will increase and businesses that supply quality feed at affordable prices
are poised to benefit.
3 New from Addismaleda, 2022 (https: //addismaleda. com/archives/15812)
3 ITC data, 2022
36 Invest in the Ethiopian Poultry Sector, ENTAG, 2020
37 The Poultry Market System in Ethiopia: Challenges from COVID-19, Feed the Future, 2020
14
3. Setting Up a Parent Stock Management and Feed
Processing Centre
3.1 The investment proposal
The objective of the investment (the poultry centre) is two-fold; 1) establishing a parent stock
management centre that produces and distributes commercial day-old chicks for poultry farmers,
and 2) setting up a feed processing plant that supplies both to its centre and poultry farmers.
Depending on the absorption capacity of the market, the centre might engage in production of
poultry eggs and meat for urban and rural markets in the long term to improve demand for poultry
products, curtain on imports and save foreign exchange.
Based on the current market conditions, the poultry centre will start with a facility that has the
capacity to breed 180,000 parent stocks to produce over 15 million DOCs and 40,000 tons of poultry
feed annually. Since there are no grandparent management centres in Ethiopia, the poultry centre
will need to import parent stocks from breeding companies from which fertilized eggs can be raised
and hatched to produce DOCs of three types: layers, broilers, and duals. The mix of DOCs will be
determined based on market demand. To complement its supply of DOCs, the poultry centre will
produce and supply starters, rearing, pullet, grower, finisher, and other types of feed to farmers. The
product mix for feed will be 75:25 for layer and broiler chickens, although production of broiler feed
might increase during holiday seasons.
The total investment cost to establish the centre is estimated to be USD 14.17 million. From the total,
about 46 per cent will be spent on constructing an efficient DOCs production and feed processing
facility. Machinery and equipment for the poultry centre need to be imported by reputable suppliers.
Because importing inputs for productionboth parent stock and feed inputsare dependent on
FOREX availability and seasonality of agricultural production, operating the poultry centre will be a
cash-intensive endeavour, hence, 12 per cent of the investment will be earmarked for working
capital.
Table 2: Investment cost of setting up the poultry centre
Description Cost Parentage
(In US Dollars) Share
Construction of the Facilities 5,919,540 46
Machinery and Equipment 3,162,180 25
Vehicles 800,000 6
Furniture and Fixtures 1,000,000 8
Pre-operating Costs 500,000 4
Working Capital 1,500,000 12
Sub-total 1,288,172 91
Contingency 1,288,172 9
TOTAL INVESTMENT COST 14,169,892 100
15
The investment project is expected to be funded 100 per cent by equity capital from potential
investors. To de-risk the investment, investors might explore potential debt financing from
international financial service providers. However, because securing such debt might take longer
time, implementation of the project could be delayed. To avoid such delays, we recommend
commencement of the project only after the full funding for the investment is secured.
Various cost elements might show variations due to international and local cost drivers. For example,
the working capital need could show significant increase if the price of major inputs continues rising
in Ethiopia. As a result, investors are recommended to reserve contingency fund of up to 10 per cent
to mitigate this risk.
The investment project could be explored in various forms including bringing an all-new investment
to establish the poultry sector, partner with existing feed producers and hatcheries or exploring
potential partnerships with cooperatives and unions. A staged approach could also be explored
where production could start in phases and would be scaled based on the market adoption.
3.2 Target market
The poultry centre will primarily target the local poultry farms. The number of small-scale poultry
farms in Ethiopia is not known, however, they provide the largest share of eggs and meat in the
market. Lack of sufficient DOCs and poultry feed are the two largest bottlenecks for the growth of
poultry farms and supply of eggs and chicken meat in Ethiopia. As a result, the domestic market
offers an untapped potential to engage in the distribution of DOCs and poultry feed across Ethiopia.
The market for the supply of poultry feed alone is estimated to be over USD 160 million.
Additionally, recent changes on the supply and price of feed in the Ethiopian market show the viability
of the local market. Increasing cost of production has created shortage in supply and prices have
been rising. In some months, the price has increased four-fold in just a year*. According to Ethiopia
Poultry Producers and Processors Association (EPPPA), the rising cost of poultry farming have forced
fifteen to twenty farms to shut their operation in early 2022. To remedy the situation, the
engagement of the private sector is of paramount importance. Producers that can navigate these
challenges are positioned to become leading suppliers of both DOCs and poultry feed in the market.
Beyond the local market, there is an attractive potential to export products. Because the local market
may not be able to absorb the full volume of DOCs produced initially, the poultry centre must target
export opportunities. In addition, shortage of feed is also apparent in the East and North African
markets. The total market of feed in these markets is valued as mare than USD 2.9 billion*'. Currently,
countries like Egypt, Morocco and Algeria are importing animal feed including poultry from Europe
38 Ethiopia's Livestock Systems: Overview and Areas of Inquiry. Gainesville, FL, USA: Feed the Future Innovation Lab
for Livestock Systems, 2021
3% Review on Compound Animal Feed Processing in Ethiopia... , Demissie Negash, 2017
{(https: //www. avensonline. org/wp-content/uploads/JNH-2469-4185-03-0030. pdf)
40 News from Addismaleda, 2022, available at https: //addismaleda. com/archives/15812
41 Opportunity to invest in a compound animal feed ... , ATA, 2016
16
to meet local demand. Ethiopia is positioned strategically and has logistical cost-advantages to
address these markets and becoming an alternative sourcing destination in Africa.
Ethiopia-based producers can also benefit from preferential trade agreementsimproving access to
market and providing unique value to investors. Ethiopia is a member of Common Market for Eastern
and Southern Africa (COMESA) with preferential access to regional market of 400 million people. In
addition, the country has accepted to join African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), an
agreement that will allow free market access in the continent. When the agreement comes into
effect, it will open new corridors for Ethiopia-based manufacturers to export their products to African
countries.
Participating in trade shows and conferences is considered as the industry's norm to generate leads.
Several events to bring together key global and regional players are organized every year. For
example, the Ethio Poultry Expo 2019, held in Addis Ababa, had gathered 114 exhibitors from 26
countries. Such events provide the platform to find potential suppliers and buyers for the investment
project. As a result, the project needs to allocate sufficient funds to leverage these conferences and
build win-win relationships with industry participants.
For feed, the poultry centre can employ two sales strategies 1) directly sell to commercial farms, and
2) distribute products through agents. These strategies have differentimpacts in the company's sales
and profitability. For example, while selling directly to commercial farms improves profit margins,
volume of distribution could be limited. On the contrary, using agents will require the poultry centre
to offer its products at discounted prices but will increase its sales and value of profit. A mix of these
strategies can be utilized to reach both urban and rural markets, and large and small-sized farms.
For DOCs, due to the high-risk of mortality, direct distribution is recommended. Farmers can directly
buy from the multiplication centre, or the centre can provide on-farm delivery.
3.3 Technical study
3.3.1 Construction of the poultry centre
When setting up a parent stock multiplication centre, the amount of floor and feeder space is critical
for optimal flock welfare and performance. In different countries, stock density might differ based
on local legislation, climate and season, type, system and quality of housing and equipment,
ventilation, and quality assurance requirements. While that is the case, many parent stock
multiplication centres recommend a stock density during rear (10-105 days) to be 3-4 birds/m? for
male and 4-8 birds/m? for female. This would mean, for an operation that aims to rear 180,000 birds
at atime, there is a need to secure 12-15 hectares of land to construct the parent stock multiplication
centre.
Selecting the right areas for the investment project is critically important. The poultry centre must be
located as far as possible from other poultry operations and each phase of production should be
treated as separate units. The size, relative situation and design of the facility should minimize
transmission of pathogens between and within flocks. The facility should be constructed in a way
17
that allows easy and thorough cleaning and the application of disinfectants. The walls and roofs
should contain insulation with a moisture barrier and rodent proof materials and ceiling height
should be adequate for proper ventilation. With electrically powered equipment, it is essential to use
a reliable source of electric power to operate electrical ventilation, heating, lighting, and feeding
equipment. Also, it is essential to install standby generators and an appropriate alarm system in case
of power failure.
Controlled or closed environment houses are the most popular form of ventilation system for parent
stock due to the ability to provide better control of the internal environment under a range of
ambient conditions. DOC breeding farms must follow management programs recommended by the
breeding company including stocking size, feeding, hatchery, transportation, biosecurity, etc.
If the feed processing facility were established in the same location, then there is a need to secure
additional 5-8 hectares of land to build a separate feed processing site. The facility must construct
sufficient storage houses and residential houses.
3.3.2 Machines and equipment
Both product lines of the investment project, i. e. , DOCs and poultry feed, require a different set of
machinery and equipment. It is vital that the correct equipment is always used. Inferior, substandard,
or improvised equipment will always result in variable performances and ultimately large financial
loss.
Table 3: List of equipment for parent stock brooding period
Floor Cages
Age (weeks) 0-2 2-5 0-3 3-5
Ventilation Minimum per hour / kg 0.7 m? 0.7 m? 0.7 m2 0.7 m2
Stocking density Birds / m? 20 12 80 45
cm? / bird 125 220
Chicks / chick drinker 75 80
Water supply Birds / drinker 75 75
Birds / nipple 10 10 10 10
Birds / starting pan 50
Feed supply cm of chain feeders 4 5 2 4
Birds / round feeder 38-63 38-63
Equipment used in the house should be designed for easy access and removal for clean-out,
maintenance, and bio security consideration.
For the poultry feed processing line, several machines, equipment and siloes need to be imported
and built. The following table provides an indicative list of machines for the processing plant,
although type and units of machines might differ depending on the design and layout of the plant.
42 parent stock management guide, Hendrix Genetics
18
Table 4: Proposed list of poultry feed processing machines*
Poultry feed processing Capacity Purpose
machines (tons/hour)
Used for cleaning granular and powdery raw
Feed cleani i t 15-20
eed cleaning equipmen materials
Used to convey powder, small granules and small
Conveying equipment 20 blocks and other bulk materials
. Recover useful materials from the air flow in the
Dust removal and magnetic
separation equipment 20 production process, purify the dust-containing gas,
and protect the environment of the feed factory
Poultry feed grinder machine 18-25 Crush the raw materials
Eeed mixer machine Mixing various materials after compounding
Feed pellet machine 15-20 earoes and edible quality of the feed
Pellet plant cooler 13-18 -
Pellet crumbler machine 10-20 -
Feed grading machine 15-20 -
Feed packaging machine - -
3.3.3 Sourcing of inputs for production
The main component for producing DOCs is parent stock. Currently, there is no established
grandparent management centre in Ethiopia, hence, the investment project needs to continually
import parent stocksboth layers and broilersfrom selected grandparent multiplication centres
(e. g. , Hendrix Genetics, Aviagen, etc. ).
Production of feed requires composition of various inputs. An input mix that provides the desired
level of crude energy and protein content needs to be formulated. The Ministry of Agriculture in
Ethiopia has set out a guideline to ensure that feed producers include the minimum level of standard
in their production. There is a practice of using feed formulation software (e. g. , feed win) with small-
scale feed processors in Ethiopia. To avoid irregularities, the poultry centre should install feed
processing equipment that has its own computerized system to regulate mixture and maintain
standard and quality of productions.
Per the industry practice, maize is the major ingredient in poultry feed production, constituting 40-
50 per cent of the mix. Ethiopia is the second highest producers of maize in Sub-Saharan Africa,
producing 8,600 thousand tons of maize in 2020. Since the 1970s, production of maize has increased
by an average 7.64 per cent >. However, demand is higher than supply, hence, there is frequently
shortage in the market. Especially, because maize is used for households consumption as a staple
43 List of machines sourced from a Chinese supplier
44 The Agricultural Transformation Agency (ATA) has also developed a formulation manual for feed production
45 World Data Atlas, 2022
19
food, poultry producers need to compete with humans to find supply of maize for processing. In the
short-term, the poultry centre needs to source maize from aggregators/traders/brokers in the
Oromia (e. g. , Wollega, Nekemte, Illubabur, Ziway etc. ), Amhara (e. g. , Gojam) and the SNNPR regions.
As a result, prices could be expected to be volatile, as it would be affected by brokers margin. For
example, at the time this report was under review, price of maize was around USD 470 per ton
which was double what it used to be a year before.
The other key input for feed production is sayabean, which might constitute 18-30 per cent of the
mix. Although it accounts for only 4 per cent of pulses produced in Ethiopia, soyabean production
has increased by an average 12 per cent from 2015 to 2020%. The country has produced 125,623 tons
of soyabean in 2020 and productivity has been improving, reaching 23.03 quintals/hectare. However,
because soyabean is an export commodity (up to 95 per cent exported), supply is in shortage for
local processing. Since 2019, soyabean is exclusively being traded at the Ethiopian Commodities
Exchange (ECX), and processors can source soyabean only through this platform. Like maize, the
price of soyabean has increased recently, trading at over USD 880/ton in March 2022.
Oilseed cakes (e. g. , nug, peanut, sunflower, soya, etc. ) are used as source of protein in the production
of poultry feed and are sourced from oilseed processors/millers or traders. If available, oilseed cakes
can replace the need to process soyabean to extract fat. Currently, Ethiopia relies on imports to
supply edible oil. However, significant efforts are underway to substitute imports with local
production. Large scale oilseed processors are under Figure 6: Potential composition of feed
formationwith an estimated combined 1,000,000+ tons ingredients (Percentage)
of production capacity. When these come into effect,
the supply of oilseed cakes in the local market is expected
to improve. Even then, processors might opt for Others
exporting oilseed cakes to generate FOREX, so the (up to 20%)
poultry centre will need to compete aggressively.
Premixes add vitamins and other important mineral to g Maize
poultry feed, making up 3-5 per cent of the mix. Because
premix is not currently produced in Ethiopia, the poultry Soyabean
centre would need access to FOREX to import. Other (up to 25%)
inputs used in the production of poultry feed include
wheat bran, limestone, salt, etc. , and are sourced from
local factories.
(up to 50%)
In the long-term, it needs to establish direct relationship with farmers and engage in contract
farming or explore potential backward integration into maize and soyabean production. Several
factors including drought, political stability and other competing crops are currently affecting the
production volume of maize and soyabean. As a result, agro-processors have started to integrate
46 An interview with a poultry feed producer
47 Agriculture Survey Report, Central Statistics Agency, 2020
48 Oilseed processors under formation include PhiBela Edible Qil (500,000 MT), Shemu Group (285,000 MT), MIDROC
Group (219,000 MT), WA Qil Factory (36,000 MT), Richland and Nirvana Processing.
20
their factories with agriculture development. To ensure sustainability, the poultry centre needs to
supplement raw materials sourcing from traders with its own portion of production (e. g. , 25-50 per
cent of maize could be grown). Alternatively, it would be dependent on applicable policies, maize
and/or soyabean could be imported.
As indicated above, exploring the export market will allow the poultry centre to generate its own
FOREX. As much as the FOREX retention law in Ethiopia allows, this resource could be used to import
inputs without the need to apply for FOREX with local banks. Investors can also import inputs using
franco valuta.
There is a need to address the lack of linkages in the poultry value chain. Some inputs critical for
poultry farming are available in the country, but due to poor linkages, are either wasted or sold at a
different market. For example, avocado residues (peel and seed), a byproduct from avocado oil
producing enterprises, are rich in proteins that can be used in animal feed. However, the byproduct
is currently being wasted because of poor linkages and lack of extraction technologies. Oil cakes, a
byproduct from edible oil producers, have a similar effect in improving feed production, but is mostly
exported to generate FOREX. There is a need to develop policies to create linkages between agro-
processors and the poultry value chain and make these linkages economically viable for sustainable
engagements.
3.4 Organizational structure and staffing
The poultry centre will need diverse human power to effectively manage its operation. Although
operating from different facilities, corporate services of both the poultry farm and feed production
units need will be centralized for effective integration. The following organogram depicts a high-level
organizational structure for the poultry centre.
Figure 7: Organizational structure of the poultry centre
Manager,
1 Li L LJ L]
Farm Nutrition Health Quality/ Sourcing/
Poultry Farm
Manager ~~ Supervisor Supervisor Biosecurity Procurement
L 1 LJ 1
Feed Processing Factory Nutrition/ Quality Sourcing/
Manager Formulation Supervisor Procurement
Group CEO
. Human .
Finance ei Marketing R&D
LJ
Proper
Corporate Services perty
Admin SpE
Both production units require a specific skillset. For example, the DOC multiplication farm requires
people with the following capabilities:
4? Franco Valuta is a method of payment in which importing of goods is permitted through bank transfers, without the
need to open letter of credits (LCs). Importers need to get a franco valuta permit from the National Bank of Ethiopia to
use this method.
50 Parent stock management manual, Hendrix Genetics
21
* Strong knowledge of animal husbandry: sound knowledge of the biology and husbandry of
chickens, including how their needs may be best provided for in all circumstances
 Skills in animal husbandry: demonstratable skills in observation, handling care and treatment
of chickens and problem detection and resolution
* Personal qualities: affinity and love for chickens, dedication and patience.
Likewise, the feed processing unit must be equipped with staff that have technical knowledge of feed
production, sourcing, and distribution. At full capacity, the poultry centre will create jobs for over 400
employees.
3.5 Cost-benefit analysis
Based on conservative estimates, a high-level cost-benefit analysis projects that an investment of
USD 14.1 million in establishing the parent stock multiplication and feed processing facility will
generate an internal rate of return (IRR) of 31 per cent over seven years. The net present value (NPV)
of the investment project at 25 per cent discount rate is estimated to be over USD 15 millionwhich
indicates an attractive value addition on invested capital. It has the capacity to become a USD 100+
million company in ten years and explore forward and backward-integration opportunities.
Table 5: A high-level income statement of the proposed project
Income Statement Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 Year 7
Revenue from the Poultry Farm 15,300,000 18,207,000 21,666,330 25,782,933 30,681,690 36,511,211 43,448,341
Revenue from the Feed Processing 8,651,034 12,868,414 18,376,095 25,512,145 30,359,453 41,288,856 49,133,738
Gross Revenue 23,951,034 31,075,414 40,042,425 51,295,078 61,041,143 77,800,067 92,582,079
COGS at the Poultry Farm 7,750,977 92,196,172 10,919,907 12,976,838 15,432,451 18,365,211 21,869,149
COGS at the Feed Processing 6,055,724 2,007,890 12,863,266 17,858,502 21,251,617 28,902,199 34,393,617
Total Cost of Goods Sold 13,806,701 18,204,062 23,783,173 30,835,340 36,684,068 47,267,410 56,262,766
Gross Profit 10,144,333 12,871,352 16,259,252 20,459,738 24,357,075 30,532,657 36,319,313
Gross Margin 42% 41% 41% 40% 40% 39% 39%
Operating Expenses
Marketing 500,000 600,000 720,000 864,000 1,036,800 1,244,160 1,492,992
Human Resource 4,008,000 4,809,600 5,771,520 6,925,824 8,310,989 9,973,187 11,967,824
Other Expenses 1,197,552 1,553,771 2,002,121 2,564,754 3,052,057 3,890,003 4,629,104
Total Opeating Expenses 5,705,552 6,963,371 8,493,641 10,354,578 12,399,846 15,107,350 18,089,920
24% 22% 21% 20% 20% 19% 20%
EBITDA 4,438,782 5,907,981 7,765,610 10,105,160 11,957,229 15,425,307 18,229,394
Margin 18.5% 19.0% 19.4% 19.7% 19.6% 19.8% 19.7%
Depreciation 1,338,413 1,338,413 1,338,413 1,338,413 1,400,913 1,599,022 1,599,022
Interest - - - - - - -
Earnings Before Tax 3,100,369 4,569,568 6,427,197 8,766,747 10,556,316 13,826,285 16,630,371
Taxes 930,111 1,370,870 1,928,159 2,630,024 3,166,895 4,147,886 4,989,111
Net Income 2,170,258 3,198,698 4,499,038 6,136,723 7,389,421 9,678,400 11,641,260
22
The above calculation is based on limited assumption of the operational aspects of both the parent
stock management farm and feed processing facility and should be considered as informative only.
Investors looking to explore this investment opportunity are advised to conduct a full feasibility
study.
23
3.6 Assessment of risks
The following table details potential risks and mitigation strategies at different stages of the
investment.
Table 6: Assessment of potential risk to the investment project
Nature of Risk
Planning Risk
Poor planning of activities might
impact milestones and subsequent
steps towards establishment
Mitigation Approach
Develop detailed plan of action to account
for all steps necessary for establishing the
venture
Capital raising
risk
Investors might not be able to raise
the full capital needed to establish
the venture
Leverage other forms of financing (e. g. ,
debt, in-kind investments, etc. ) to address
the gap
Delays in project
implementation
Land, infrastructure, etc. may not be
available from the gov. at the
expected time
Machinery and equipment suppliers
might delay delivery of production
lines
Begin each step of inquiry and application
as early as possible and continuously
follow up
Leverage networksgovernment and
privateto push through the process
Input sourcing
Shortage FOREX to import inputs for
production (e. g. , parent stock,
premix, etc. )
Increasing cost/shortage of locally
sourced inputs might affect cost of
production
Explore potential ways to generate FOREX
(e. g. , export)
Effectively plan for all sourcing and
procurement needs, have good buffer
Engage in long-term contracts for key
inputs for production
Market risk
Demand for poultry products may not
increase as expected despite strong
awareness creation campaigns
Explore the export market as an
alternative market destination
Potentially explore forward-integration
into chicken meat processing
Operational risk
Diseases might threaten the whole
flock and risk loss of investment
Employee turnover could reduce
efficiency, knowledge transfer, etc.
Employ strong biosecurity measures to
prevent an outbreak
Continually provide training and
development to employees, provide
above-industry compensation packages to
retain staff
Policy risk
Policy directions might change
unexpectedly affecting operation
(e. qg. , FOREX prioritization, FOREX
retention, export of live chickens, etc. )
Work closely with the government to
influence policy directions, anticipate
potential changes (e. qg. , lobbying for a law
that keeps parent stock management
centres in isolation to ensure biosecurity,
exempting such venture to import
maize/oilseeds and export DOCs and
feed, etc)
Political risk
Political unrest could jeopardize the
whole investment
Closely work with law enforcement to
reduce the risk of damages during
unrests
24
3.7 Implementation plan
To implement the centre or investment project and begin operation in Ethiopia, potential investors
will need to go through several steps. Though it may vary from sector to sector, the overall process
until product launch might take 18 to 36 months. Some of the steps listed below will overlap, hence,
could reduce the total estimated time of project delivery. Each of these activities could further be
divided into multiple steps.
Table 7: High-level implementation plan
Activities
Launching discussion with
government (including site
Visits)
Signing MOU with key
partners (e. g. , MoA)
Conducting feasibility study
to assess viability and
determine production
capacity
Fund raising to collect
investment capital
Licensing and registration
(inv. permit)
Construction of the facility
Sourcing machineries
Installation of machinery
and equipment
Identifying and hiring
human resources
Sourcing inputs for
Training of staff
Test production
Getting business license
Launch
3.8 Socio-economic impact of the Investment Project
Improving access to productive breeds and poultry feed would have a direct impact on maximizing
economic benefits from the poultry sector. Currently, Ethiopia's poultry sector is dominated by
indigenous breedsabout 91 per cent of all chickens are characterized as suchwhich have low
productivity. Investing in a parent stock multiplication centre would increase access to improved
breeds, changing the current demography of the chicken population with more productive chicks.
With increasing production of DOCs, prices are expected to decline, which contributes to improving
capacity of small-scale poultry farms. This, coupled with access to quality and affordable feed, can
25
increase the economic value of poultry. Poultry farms that are currently suffering from shortage of
feed can be rejuvenated to resume and scale operations. In addition, poultry farming has the
potential to improve household income in the rural community, to the extent where it becomes the
primary income generating activity. This investment project has the potential to unlock that
opportunity. Further, it has the potential to positively impact thousands of maize and soyabean
farmers through its direct-buying and contract farming programs.
The investment project will also create direct jobs at the poultry farm and feed processing facilities.
A model that includes 1) building capacity of women and youths with the right skillset for poultry
farming, 2) availing adequate resource of both DOCs and feed, and 3) creating linkages with the end
market could be designed, piloted in selected regions, and then scaled to cover additional regions
could be designed. This kind of approach would create job opportunities to at least 10,000 groups
and more than 50,000 women and youth (by availing 20 per cent of produced DOCs and feed to this
initiative).
In line with Ethiopian government objectives, this investment is also both import-substitution and
export-oriented and expands the potential to generate FOREX and become a catalyst of growth in
the sector.
3.9 Environmental impact assessment
Appropriate measures must be in place to ensure biosecurity at the poultry centre. Unless safe and
knowledge-driven poultry rearing is practiced, diseases could spread to other poultry farms in the
country, including the export market. When commercial farms import parent stock, one of the key
decision factors in selecting the right supplier is biosecurity of the farm from which they plan to
source. Producers usually refuse to import from companies that operate in countries where there
are prevalent chicken diseases like influenza scares or new castle breakouts, as these risks might
result in mortality of chicken upon arrival or down the line in production.
Unproper waste disposal could also affect the environment. Especially, negligence when disposing
of bio-hazardous waste products could transmit viral diseases to other poultry flocks. Poor cleaning
practice might lead to the remnant of infectious materials on rearing facilities, which will affect the
next flock. The proper handling of waste is essential to ensure an efficient and sustainable poultry
farm as chickens, especially exotic breeds, are highly prone to diseases compared to other livestock.
To reduce this impact, commercial farms typically burn hazardous waste, including birds affected by
a certain disease. Other wastes like chicken manure are used as fertilizers in planting and gardening,
hence, are given away or sold at cheap prices. Similarly, waste from feed processing are usually
reprocessed into cattle feed production.
Poultry has the lowest CO, emissions compared to other meat processing. As a result,
environmentalists favour chicken meat and is considered by many to be the meat product of the
future.
51 Invest in the Ethiopian Poultry Sector, ENTAG, 2020
26
4. The Prospect of Setting Up a Grandparent Stock
Management Centre
One of the key levers of the poultry sector is having consistent access to parent stocks. However,
there is no company in Ethiopia established to manage grandparent stocks from which parent stocks
are produced. Currently, hatcheries rely on imported parent stocks from Europe (e. g. , Netherlands)
and South America (e. g. , Brazil). The number of parent stocks in the country is 2021 was estimated
to be about 71,000 broiler breeder stock, 7,300 layer breeder stock and 141,700 dual-purpose parent
stocks2 The stock needs to be replaced with a new flock every 18 months. Compared to demand in
the market, the amount of parent stock in the country is very low.
Access to FOREX has been the major bottleneck to consistently import parent stocks. Ethiopia has a
negative balance of payment, which reached USD 10 billion in 2020/21 fiscal year. The scarcity of
FOREX limits the number of parent stocks that hatcheries can import to produce DOCs. In addition,
hatcheries cannot predict when FOREX could be availablewhich results in overflow of DOCs when
FOREX is released at the same time for queued hatcheries. This has contributed to price volatility in
the market and has a negative forward-effect that extends across the whole value chain.
Recognizing this challenge, the Livestock Master Plan (LMP) has identified improving the availability
of chicken breeds in Ethiopia as one of the key intervention areas. To resolve this challenge, the
LMP had envisioned establishing one national and four regional grandparent multiplication centres
in the country. Ultimately, these farms would produce 440 million DOCs per year. The government
envisages to engage the private sector in operationalizing such farms through promotion, incentives,
business extension services and consumer training. These plans have been carried forward in the
current agricultural 10-year development plan.
To realize this goal, it is important to build relationships with genetic companies. There are a limited
number of companies in the world that have the genetic material to operate great-grandparent and
grandparent multiplication centres. The engagement models of these companies range from
country to countryin some they control management of the farm and in others, they receive royalty
payments for their supply of pure breeds. One company interviewed has indicated that they have
established two grandparent multiplication centres in Africa (in West and Southern Africa). While they
are direct equity owners in ane company, they receive royalty payment for their breeds in the other
market.
Investing in grandparent stock management centre requires large investment and various
requirements need to be met. Depending on the size of the farm, the investment might range from
the tens of millions of dollars to the hundreds. As a result, commercial farms looking to invest in this
52 Invest in the Ethiopian Poultry Sector, ENTAG, 2020
53 Annual Report, National Bank of Ethiopia, 2020/21
54 Ethiopia livestock master plan (2015-2020), Ministry of Agriculture, 2015
55 Invest in the Ethiopian Poultry Sector, ENTAG, 2020
27
space consider various factors before engagingthese factors determine whether a country offers
a good value proposition and is viable from an investment perspective.
1. Market maturity: Industry experts indicate that producing 600,000 parent stocks annually
as the minimum threshold that makes grandparent stock management centre a viable
business. The Ethiopian market must be able to absorb at least this amount of production.
As indicated in the market assessment, per capita consumption of poultry products in
Ethiopia is low. Stakeholdersboth public and privateneed to work towards developing the
market by implementing initiatives that improve nutrition (e. g. , school feeding programs)
and make eggs and poultry meat part of the normal diet in both rural and urban markets.
Multiplication farms might consider the export market, focusing on East Africa, as an
additional market destination. However, because regional markets like Kenya and Sudan
have already established stable source of parent stock, there is no strong business case for
positioning Ethiopia as a regional hub.
2. Infrastructure availability: Parent stock multiplication centres need guaranteed water
supply, electric power, communication and internet lines and road access for heavy transport
for feed and live poultry. The infrastructure needs to be stable and consistent to ensure
smooth operation of the farm (lack of it would be costly for the investment). Additionally, the
investment would require 20-30 hectares of virgin land (i. e. , that has not been allotted to
poultry before) to construct a state-of-the-art facility. The location must allow for managing
biosecurity risks (e. g. , no poultry farms must be found within 3.2 kilometer radius of the
farm). Finding a location that meets these standards is a daunting task.
3. Human resources: Since parent stock multiplication is labour-intensive and knowledge-
based investment, it requires highly skilled and experienced individuals in the field which is
currently lacking.
4. Policy assurance: Potential investors would need priority access to FOREX to import breeds,
medicines, equipment, etc. Because the investment will be long-term, investors need
guaranteed land lease rates. Import and export restrictions on genetics, inputs, etc. might
be detrimental to the operation of the parent stock farm. To mitigate these uncertainties,
investors need flexibility in the application of policies that are currently operating in Ethiopia
(e. g. , restrictions on DOCs and feed export, import on importing maize and oilseeds, FOREX
retention, etc. ). Further, policies must be in place to identify and control disease outbreaks.
In the short-term, the government can start discussions with global genetic companies and potential
investors interested in the poultry sector in Ethiopia. While discussions develop, the government, in
coordination with potential investors, can explore how the above-listed requirements can be met.
With a view of establishing the first grandparent management farm in the foreseeable future (five to
ten years), the government can work to lay the foundation work including identifying areas for
potential development, availing infrastructure and developing local talent.
56 Parent stock handbook, Arbor Acres, 2018
28
5. Recommendations
Based on the business case assessment including analysis of the market potential and technical
requirements of the investment project, few recommendations that are important to improve the
investment landscape in the poultry sector, particularly related to improving access to breeds and
feed, can be inferred. These recommendations include:
1. Improve the market potential/create demand through continuous awareness creation
campaigns: one of the major challenges currently affecting the attractiveness of the market
is the low per capita consumption of eggs and chicken meat in Ethiopia. There remains
limited awareness of the nutritional benefits that poultry consumption offersin both urban
and rural communities. Where lack of awareness drives low consumption, the government
must work with the private sector and development partners to create demand. This might
be accomplished through behaviour-change and awareness creation campaigns. Education
on nutritional benefits of poultry consumption could be delivered in schools, hospitals and
other public settings. In addition, mass-media marketing through advertising, radio and
television programs could be used as instruments to create demand. These campaigns
should include information about diversification of poultry consumption to break the
cultural, single-way consumption of chicken meat and showcase how poultry could be
integrated in the regular diet of Ethiopians.
2. Create linkages in the value chain to improve access to inputs for producers and eggs
and chicken meat for consumers: the cost of production for poultry feed as well as poultry
farming is currently affected by poor linkages in the value chain. There are several actors
operating between producers and end-users, which are adding little value but contributing
to increasing of pricesnegatively affecting both producers and buyers. Improving linkages
in the value chain (e. g. , by creating a platform where inputs can be sourced directly from
producers) will reduce both uncertainties in the market and price of inputs, thereby
increasing the affordability of quality feed and improved breeds. On the other hand,
improving market linkages will allow small and medium-scale farms to sell their products
with better margins and improve their growth potential. Further, such kind of market linkage
will reduce wastage and foster healthy competition among poultry producers.
3. Creatively work with poultry producers and associations to improve the investment
environment and access to inputs: while incentives are good instruments to attract
investors in parent stock multiplication and feed processing, there are several policy
interventions needed to improve the investment landscape. For example, because
investments in the sector is time-sensitive i. e. , the risk of losing all stock due to lack of
vaccines or high cost of feed, investors would need preferential access to FOREX. In addition,
lack of one type of input {e. g. , premix) could halt production and jeopardize the whole
operation, adding to the need to have continuous access to FOREX. The demand for FOREX
could be partly satisfied by ensuring access to critical inputs locally. For example, oilcakes are
currently being exported by oilseeds processors. The government can facilitate buying
arrangements between oilseed processors and poultry feed producers and support in
29
formulating a deal that is attractive to all parties (including buying inputs locally in foreign
currencies). Further, the government must provide a guarantee against sudden policy
changes that might affect the operation of investments.
4. With a long-term view, carry out targeted investment promotion to attract parent
stock multiplication centres and large-scale global feed processors. The number of
poultry genetics companies in the world are limited. The government, with the support of
development partners, need to develop a strong value proposition (including identification
of a site with strong biosecurity for parent stock multiplication) and implement a targeted
investment promotion strategy to whet the appetite of investors. This includes identifying
genetics companies, conducting missions, negotiations, signing Memorandum of
Understandings and following up to ensure implementation of the intended investment
projects. Partnerships in the form of PPPs must be designed and explored with potential
partners if this approach is found to be the most suitable.
5. Employ a pilot-then-scale model towards investing in grandparent multiplication in
Ethiopia. Currently, the government has a plan to establish five grandparent multiplication
centres in Ethiopia. Countries that have higher per capita consumption of eggs and chicken
meat in Africa have, in most cases, one or two grandparent multiplication centres. Based on
these learnings, there might be a need to revise the ambitious plan, consolidate efforts and
start with only one grandparent multiplication centre in the short-term. A pilot program could
be implemented first, then based on success, scale it to meet local demand and potential
export opportunities. This approach reduces the investment risks and increases the
likelihood of success.
Implementing the above recommendations will require a strong coordination between the
government, the private sector and development partners.
6. Conclusion
Based on the analysis, establishing a parent stock multiplication and feed processing facility clearly
brings positive economic and social benefits to many stakeholders including investors, existing small,
medium, and large poultry farms. Moreover, increasing availability and affordability of eggs and
chicken meat has the potential to improve nutrition intake in Ethiopia. This business case study
provides public and private stakeholders with data-driven insight and a starting point to engage with
the right partners and further explore how it could be realized.
Finally, it should be noted that while this business case study endeavoured to provide a
comprehensive picture of investing in the poultry sector in Ethiopia, potential investors are advised
to strive to conduct an in-depth feasibility assessment before and build upon the information
provided in this document. This will help investors fully understand the opportunities, challenges,
risks and its impact and adapt the investment strategies accordingly to meet their objectives.
30
Annex
Annex 1: List of stakeholder consultations informing this report
Semi-structured interview
Ethiopian Ministry of Agriculture - Livestock Sector Development Division
Ethiopian Ministry of Agriculture - Poultry Development Directorate
Ethiopian Ministry of Agriculture - Import/Export
Large-scale feed producer, Addis Ababa
Genetics and parent stock distributer, The Netherlands
Ethiopian Poultry Producers and Processors Association
Ethiopian Investment Commission - Investment Promotion Directorate
International Livestock Research Institute, Livestock Scientist
Amhara Enterprise Development, Bahir Dar
Poultry industry expert, Addis Ababa
Medium-scale feed producer, Oromia
Large-scale DOCs producer, Addis Ababa
Small-scale feed producer, Oromia
Large-scale DOCs producer, Amhara
Medium-scale feed and DOCs producer, Addis Ababa
Smallholder poultry farmer, Oromia Region, Sendafa I
Smallholder poultry farmer, Oromia Region, Sendafa II
Smallholder poultry farmer, Oromia Region, Bishoftu I
Smallholder poultry farmer, Oromia Region, Bishoftu II
Smallholder poultry farmer, SNNPR Region, Hawassa I
Smallholder poultry farmer, SNNPR Region, Hawassa II
Large retailer I, Addis Ababa
Large retailer II, Addis Ababa
Fresh produce distributor, Addis Ababa
Fast-food chain restaurant
Fast-food restaurant focusing on fried chicken
Surveys
150 consumers in different areas of Addis Ababa
31
Annex 2: List of stakeholders who participated in the validation
workshop
Mol Ayalneh Abawa
MoA Yohannes Girma
Tilahun Degefa
Dejene Takele
EIC Tariku Getachew
Fekadu Nigussie
MolLS Nigist Melaku
Alemtsehay Dersolegn
CETU Fisehatsion Biadgilign
EEF Dawit Moges
CEEF Worku Tamirat
Ato Birhanu Million
African Agribusiness Academy
Serkalem Abebe
Ethio-Chiken Haile Kassa
Alema Farms Eyob Eticha
Elfora Agro-Industry Ali Mohammed
Alema Koudijs Feed Lema Asfaw
GIZ Teshome Dega
EDI Dr Hassen Hussein
Boru Shaha
Elere Farms Fanta Terefe
Jacob Farm Jacob Hendriksen
Tewodros Farm
Tewodros Kassahun
Chicko Meat Nahom Tadese
ECCSA Helen Retta
Consultant Berkessa Behailu
Consultant Blene T/Betemaream
Sheger Entrepreneurs Association
Alemu Zeleke
Albert Okal
Ruchika Bahl
Ayalu Admass
Meseret Shiferaw
Genet G/Mariam
Mintwab Yemane
32