Va T&F Ache? Qh
NATIONAL BANK OF ETHIOPIA

ADDIS ABABA
Directives No. FXD / 48/2017
Directive for Amendment of Retention And Utilization of
Export Earnings And Inward Remittances
Directives No. FXD /11 /1998
Whereas, it is necessary to reconsider and incentivize eligible exporter of goods and services in
line with power and responsibility vested in the National Bank of Ethiopia;
Now, therefore, in accordance with Article 27 (2) of the National Bank of Ethiopia establishment
(as amended) Proclamation No. 591/2008, these Directives are hereby issued as follows:
Article 1
Short Title
These Directives may be cited as "The Retention and Utilization of Export Earnings and Inward
Remittances Directives No. FXD/ 48 /2017".
Article 2
Definitions
For the purpose of these Directives, unless the context requires otherwise:
1. "Forex Retention Accounts" shall mean foreign currency accounts maintained by eligible
exporters of goods and services and recipients of inward remittances in accordance with
the provisions of these Directives.
2. "Delinquent list" is a list containing names of exporters who have not settled their foreign
exchange commitments with National Bank of Ethiopia.
ARGH: (vB 185 Tq, KK
ADDRESS: SUDAN STRCET ~ P. O. BOX 5550/2048 FAX No, 0115514588 TEL. No. 0115 5174 30 ADDIS ABABA
TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESS: NATIONBANK
) CODES-USED PETERSON 3" & 4 ED BENTLEY'S 2" PHRASE A. B. C. 6" EDITIO
E-mail: nbe. excd(@ cthionetet ~~ Website. www http: // www nbe. gov. et
3. "Eligible Customer" shall mean a regular recipient of foreign exchange remittances from
abroad and/or an exporter of goods or services whose name does not appear on the
delinquent list.
4. "Recipient of Inward Remittances" shall mean a resident company, institution or
individual, government organizations, other than a diplomatic mission, who receives
foreign exchange transfers from abroad.
5. "Eligible Exporter of Goods and Services" shall mean an exporter who has fully settled
his/her foreign exchange commitments with the National Bank of Ethiopia and whose
name does not appear on the delinquent list.
Article 3
Opening of Forex Retention Accounts
An authorized bank is allowed to open foreign exchange retention accounts for eligible exporters
of goods and services and inward remittances.
Article 4
Types of Foreign Exchange Retention Accounts
1) Eligible customers may open two types of foreign exchange retention accounts (current
accounts), which shall be designated as "Foreign Exchange Retention Account A", and
Foreign Exchange Retention Account B.
2) Such accounts shall only be credited from export of goods and services and incoming
transfer made for inward remittance recipients.
Article 5
Retention Rights
1) Exporters of goods and services as well as recipients of inward remittances shall
have the right to retair) their foreign exchange earnings in retention accounts A &
B as follows: -
a) Account A: Thirty percent (30%) of the account balances for an
indefinite period of time.
b) Account B: Seventy percent (70%) of the account balances for up to
28 days. After the 28 days, any balance shall
automatically be converted in the next working day into
local currency by the customer's bank using the
prevailing buying exchange rate.
2) Authorized banks can only credit funds in retention accounts only when the
recipient (beneficiary) has given written authority.
3) Authorized banks can credit funds in retention account for merchants and/or
entities licensed by the National Bank of Ethiopia to collect credit card/debit
card/prepaid card/payments for goods and service they sale;
4) Notwithstanding to the statement under sub-article 3 of this article, authorized
banks can credit funds in retention account for local merchants or entities
licensed by the National Bank of Ethiopia to collect foreign currency cash
notes for goods and services they sale such as hotels, duty free shops,
Immigration office, civil aviation authority, airline ticket offices and travel
agents, tour operators, shops operating at the airport on the airside.
Article 6
Utilization of Foreign Exchange Retention Accounts
1. Eligible exporters of goods and services as well as recipients of inward
remittance may use their foreign exchange retention account B for only 28
days, and the fund available in the foreign exchange account A may be
maintained for an indefinite period of time.
2. Accounts A and B shall be used to finance direct business related and current
payments such as:
a) import of goods, except vehicles, and related services in relation to the
business including:
8)
ii.
iil.
vii.
payment for promotional activities such as advertising and marketing
expenses;
payment for subscriptions to business publications;
payment for services rendered by non-residents against evidence that
payment is contractually due;
payment for training fee and educational expenses;
payment to import materials required for export packing, labeling
and auxiliary items;
small payments like surveillance fee, support service fee and other
expenses related to specific export shipment
b) payment for settlement of external loans and suppliers credit;
c) payment to refund tour operators, wild-life huntings, excursion programme
booked if cancelled for various reason;
d) payment of contributions to International conference Centers and workshop
participation expenses;
e) service payments for consultants, experts or professional who rendered
services;
payment to refund the unused parts on the foreign currency transferred, cover for
short shipments, weight loss or defective items;
Other payments against transactions tha
of Ethiopia from time to time.
t be approved by the National Bank
Article 7
Submission of Report
1. Authorized banks operating foreign exchange retention accounts shall send to National
Bank of Ethiopia the aggregate balances of foreign exchange held under retention
account "A" and "B" on monthly basis.
2. Authorized banks are required to identify the foreign currency retention account
number and type, on permits and tickets issued in case of utilizing the fund for purposes
listed under article 6.
Article 8
Penalty
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of these directives directive shall be
punished in accordance with Article 26 of the National Bank of Ethiopia Establishment (as
Amended) Proclamation No. 591/2008.
Article 9
Repeal
Retention and utilization of Export Earnings and Inward Remittances Directives No. FXD /11
/1998 is repealed and replaced by these Directives.
Article 10
Effective Date
These Directives shall enter into force as of October 03, 2017.