PATER EL ANchee 0TH

NATIONAL BANK OF ETHIOPIA
ADDIS ABABA
Directives No. FXD /47 /2017
Directives for Amendment of External Loan
and Suppliers Credit Directives No. REL /05/2002
Whereas, the National Bank of Ethiopia is vested by its establishment proclamation no.
501/2008 and Investment Proclamation no. 679/2012 to regulate foreign exchange and having
determined the procedures of registration to external loan is essentially set to be a criterion of
regulating foreign exchange;
Whereas, an investor who acquires an external loan shall have also obliged to register such a
loan with the National Bank of Ethiopia in accordance with the directives of the National Bank
of Ethiopia;
Now, therefore, in accordance with Articles 20 and 27(2) of the National Bank of Ethiopia
Establishment (as amended) proclamation No. 591/2008_and article 36(1 and 2) of Investment
Proclamation no. 679/2012, these directives are hereby issued as follows:
Article 1
Short Title
These directives may be cited as External Loan and Suppliers Credit Directives No. /47/2017.
Article 2
Definition
In these Directives, unless the context requires otherwise:
2.1 All-in-cost ceiling means rate of interest, other fees and expenses in foreign currency
excluding commitment fee and pre-payment fee.
2.2 Bank means a company licensed by the National B nk of Ethiopia to undertake banking
business or a bank owned by the Governmen
1
ADDRESS: SUDAN STRCET P.0. BOX 5550/2048 FAX No. 0115 51
TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESS: NATION
CODES-USED PETERSON 3 & 4" ED BEN
E-mail: nbe. excd(@ ethionetet Website. www. http: // www. nbe. gov. et
KRGT ART 18S 7 vie. 5550/2048 hi #7C 0116 51 A 5 WE 95 51 74 30 AA
8 o"D1E A 7430 ADDIS ABABA
SE A. B. C. 6" EDITIO
2.3 Exporter A person that sells goods or services that generate foreign currency;
2.4 External loan means a loan acquired from an eligible recognized lender and approved and
registered by the National Bank of Ethiopia;
2.5 Foreign capital means paid up capital obtained from foreign sources, and includes the re-
invested profits and dividends of a foreign investor and registered by pertinent government
body;
2.6 Foreign Investor means a foreigner or an enterprise wholly owned by foreign nationals,
having invested foreign capital in Ethiopia or a foreigner or an Ethiopian incorporated
enterprise owned by foreign nationals jointly investing with domestic investor, and includes
an Ethiopian permanently residing abroad and preferring treatment as a foreign investor;
2.7 Guarantee means any signed undertaking, however named or described, providing for
payment on presentation of a complying demand;
2.8 Investor means a domestic or a foreign investor having invested in Ethiopia;
2.9 Suppliers credit means an interim short term financing provided by a third party
supplier;
2.10 Usance Letter of credit means a deferred payment letter of credit payable at a
determined future date after presentation of conforming documents;
2.11 Person' means any natural or juridical person;
Article 3
General
3.1 External loan guaranteed by Federal Government of Ethiopia shall be registered by the
National Bank of Ethiopia by presenting the agreement and the guarantee issued there to.
3.2 An eligible borrower except stated under article 3.1 shall first get approval from the National
Bank of Ethiopia befpre entering to external loan and suppliers credit agreement with the
lender/supplier.
3.3 An eligible borrower shall register the foreign loan remitted in cash or in kind by producing
the necessary documents.
3.4 No repayment in convertible foreign currency may be allowed for the purpose of payment of
external loan or suppliers credit unless registered by the National Bank of Ethiopia.
3.5 A Bank is allowed to open usance letter of credit for an exporter who imports equipment, raw
materials, machineries and accessories for his export business against future export proceed.
Article 4
Eligible Borrowers and Requirements
4.1 Exporter
4.1.1 An exporter is eligible to acquire an external loan or suppliers credit provided that the
acquired loan is going to finance an export - oriented investment that generates foreign
currency.
4.1.2 A domestic investor who is engaged in projects that generate foreign currency is eligible
to acquire external loan.
4.1.3 The following requirements shall be fulfilled for approval and registration of external loan
or suppliers credit to be acquired by an exporter:
a) Application letter;
b) Valid export license given by pertinent licensing authority;
) For External loan; The draft loan agreement with detailed terms showing interest rates
and applicable charges, loan disbursement schedule, repayment schedule, borrower-
lender relationship, purpose of the loan and other particulars as may be deemed
necessary by the National Bank of Ethiopia
d) For suppliers credit; Pro-forma invoice with repayment perjod and term of payment
) Document justifying the capacity to repay the loan
4.2 Foreign Investor
4.2.1
4.2.2
4.2.3
a)
b)
)
d
A foreign investor is eligible to acquire external loan when it fulfills all requirements
of article 4.2.3 of these directives
the debt to equity ratio may not exceed 60:40 of the forei gn capital
The following requirements shall be fulfilled for approval of external loan and/or
suppliers credit to be acquired by foreign investor:
Application letter;
Valid investment or any other valid business license given by pertinent licensing
authority as the case may be applicable;
Foreign capital registration certificate issued by pertinent government body
For external loan; the draft loan agreement with detailed terms showing interest rates
and applicable charges, loan disbursement schedule. repayment schedule, borrower-
necessary by the National Bank of Ethiopia;
For suppliers credit; Pro-forma invoice with repayment period and term
Article 5
Approval and Registration of External Loan
5.1. The National Bank of Ethiopia shall issue approval letter for external loan and suppliers
credit if all conditions are fulfilled under article 4.1 and 4.2
5.2. The National Bank of Ethiopia shall register external loan up on presentation of the following
documents:
b) A bank advise (if the loan is in cash);
) Customs declaration and all relevant shipping documents (if the loan is in kind);
d) Copy of external loan approval letters
Article 6
All- in- Cost Ceilings
6.1. The all-in-cost ceilings for external loan shall be:
Average Maturity Period All-in-cost Ceilings
Up to three years six month LIBOR or Equivalent in EURIBOR Plus 2%
Three years and up to five | six month LIBOR or Equivalent in EURIBOR Plus 3%
years
More than five years six month LIBOR or Equivalent in EURIBOR Plus 5%
6.2. When a changing international market requires, the National Bank of Ethiopia may vary
the all in cost ceiling stated here in above.
Article 7
Guarantees
Any form of guarantee may not be issued by government and banks for private loan.
Article 8
Repayment of External Loan
8.1. The National Bank of Ethiopia shall approve repayment of external loan provided that the
repayment request is as per the conditions mentioned in article 5 of these Directives.
8.2. The following documents should be presented to the National Bank of Ethiopia for approval
of an external loan repayment:
b) Copy of external loan registration letter and
Article 9
Repeal
Registration of External Loan and suppliers or Foreign Partners Credit Directives No
REL/005/2002 is hereby repealed and replaced by these Directives.
Article 10
Effective Date
These Directives shall enter into force as of October 03, 2017.