Company Profile of Hawassa
Industrial Park

mE TAL Apparel AVI nD
[H) ssa pe SED a La EPIC
..
e==y) FCI @ .
QntexTM male
oO EE
PVH
Raymond, Silver Spark Apparel Ltd
Wuxi Jinmao Co. , Ltd
TAL Apparel
Arvind Ltd.
Hirdaramani Garment Plc
Busana Apparel Group
Indochine International
Isabella and Sarasavi Export (Pvt) Ltd
EPIC Group
Hela Clothing Group
Ontex Group NV
Everest Textile
Chargeurs Fashion Technologies
Quadrant Apparel Group Plc
Jiangsu Golden Island Group
Best Corporation Private Ltd
FCI Talisman (FCI Group)
il
Cada Sr Chall x
Profile of HIP
S25
city of the Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Regional State and a
premium holiday destination. Known for its hospitality, Hawassa is home to a
diverse group of people. The beautiful lake of Hawassa provides grace and a cooling
ambiance to the city. Hawassa has now added to its profile a state-of-the-art and the
countrys flagship textile and apparel industrial park that has world-class infrastructure
and a convenient plug-and-play environment.
| soa Industrial Park (HIP) is located at the heart of Hawassa, the capital
The park covers a total land area of 3 million m2. Phase | of HIP covers a land area of
|4 million m2, of which 410,000 m2 is factory shed built up area. It has an additional
area allocated for shared facilities such as apartments for about [000 expatriate staffs,
One-Stop Shop Service building, commercial buildings, health center, and exhibition
center.
HIP is the first sustainable textile and apparel park in Africa. Consistent with the
Ethiopian Government's commitment to a green-economy, HIP is designed,
constructed and operated as an eco-friendly park. It has a water and waste treatment
plant which uses the latest technology for treating and recycling about $0% of the
water used in the park. To this end, a zero-liquid discharge (ZLD) facility, the first of its
kind in Africa, has been built with a daily processing capacity of | | million liter effluent/
day. Apart from minimizing impact on surrounding soil salinity, groundwater pollution
or ecology of river bodies, this technology helps conserve water resource through
recovery and re-use of treated effluent. The technology further enables recovery and
re-use of salt used in the textile dyeing process. For this purpose, more than 32,700
m2 wide zero liquid discharge (ZLD) facilities have been constructed and more than
1.5 kms of effluent Line; 13 kms of recycle water ling; 15 kms of sewerage line and
more than 20 kms of integrated drainage lines have been constructed. p
Furthermore, the park incorporates a natural and green environment thereby
providing a soothing landscape. It provides dedicated space for greenery (about
50,000 trees will be planted inside the park) and an artificial lake of over 3,080 m3
water holding capacity.
An important aspect of HIP is the provision of streamlined and expedited
government services through One-Stop Shop (OSS) which replaces multiple agency
facility with a single entry point  key for efficient service provision and enterprise
competitiveness. OSS services currently provided at HIP include: Issuance of business
license, registration of trade name, customs clearance, work and residence permit, visa
and full-fledged banking services through the Commercial Bank of Ethiopia.
Hawassa amasses a labor supply of up to Smillion people within 50kms radius making
it an ideal investment destination for labour-intensive industries. This means a labour
cost that is 20-25% lower than Addis Ababa and a low turnover of employees due to
less competition from other industries and sectors.
Today HIP accommodates fabric mill, garment and interlining manufacturers. 18
leading foreign companies have invested in the park while necessary preparations
are finalized to facilitate the investment of 8 domestic industrialists that have been
meticulously selected. Entrants to HIP are carefully selected to ensure cohesive
and cordial relationships among investors with a shared vision of ensuring higher
productivity and competitiveness in the park. Many of the companies in HIP are
currently operational and already have begun exporting. At full capacity, the park is
expected to generate employment opportunity for close to 60,000 individuals and
export earnings of $1 billionm
ith a heritage going back over 130 years, PVH Corp. has excelled at growing
AAV and businesses with rich American heritages, becoming one of the
largest apparel companies in the world. We have over 30,000 associates
operating in over 40 countries with over $8.2 billion in 2016 revenue. PVH owns the
iconic Calvin Klein, Tommy Hilfiger; Van Heusen, IZOD, ARROW, Speedo*, Warner's
and Olga brands and market a variety of goods under these and other nationally and
internationally known, owned and licensed brands.
As an anchor investor, PVH played a prominent role by working hand-in-hand with the
Government of Ethiopia and actively supported the drive for targeted recruitment of
investors. To this end, it tapped into its impeccable list of global vendors. PVH has already
commenced production in its manufacturing facility and exported its first shipment from
the park in May, 2017. Seven of the companies that are operational in HIP supply their
products to PVH.
Corporate Responsibility (CR) is central to how PVH conducts business and is instilled
in its organization. It is applied across PVH's operations and supply chain with a firm
belief that this will strengthen its organization by managing risk, maximizing efficiencies
and driving value in a rapidly changing world. PVH's approach to CR is centered on
three key focus areas  empowering people, preserving the environment and supporting
communities with the aim of driving positive impacts across its value chain, from source
to store.
Raymond
Raymond, Silver
Spark Apparel Ltd
a turnover of about USD 1.50 Billion and an employee base of over 25000, that is
vertically and horizontally integrated to provide customers total textile solutions.
Silver Spark is rated as Indias Best Companies to Work for 2009,2014,2015 and 2016
and is partnering with the Ethiopian nation in capacity building. The Company has been
rated as the No.22 of the Best Large Workplaces in the Asian sub-continent With
over 60% market share in India, the Raymond Group is one of the largest integrated
manufacturers of worsted fabric in the world. The group owns apparel brands like
Raymond, Raymond Premium Apparel, Park Avenue, Park Avenue Woman Color Plus &
Parx.
Rms Limited, incorporated in 1925, is an Indian and global conglomerate with
Raymond invests inside HIP through its subsidiary Silver Spark Apparel Limited, and
has set-up a suit manufacturing plant with over 33,000 m2 space (consisting of 3 large
sheds combined as one) producing mens suits to be exported to the US and European
markets. The company, among other things, provided a six-month long training in India for
its middle management staff.
REER
uxi Jinmao, founded in 1993 is a Chinese company engaged in manufacturing
AVAVE fabrics, garments and pet products. In addition to a headquarter in
China and offices in US and UK; it has factories in several countries including
China, Bangladesh, Cambodia, the United States, and Vietnam. The company mainly exports
to the United States and Europe for renowned customers, including PVH, Gap, JC Penney,
Target, VF, Petco, Petsmart, Kohl's, Next, Mark & Spencer, Pets at Home. In 2015, its annual
turnover was about $290 million with more than 4000 employees across the globe.
Wuxi Jinmao invesed in HIP through its subsidiary JP (Ethiopia) Textile Company taking
a total area of around 40,000 m2 space producing various types of fabric. A pioneer
fabric mill in HIE JP (Ethiopia) Textile Company supplies its fabric to other garment
manufacturers in the park responding to the government's long held vision of creating
a vertically integrated supply chain in specialized parks. It has also installed state-of-the-
art machineries including weaving machines manufactured by Toyota and France-made
automatic drawing machineries, contributing to the enhancement of the level and
modernization of the Ethiopian textile industry.
In its initial phases, the company hired 30 new graduates from Bahir Dar University and
provided them with seven-month language training at the Confucius Institute in Addis
Ababa. They further received a six-month long technical and on-jobs training in Wuxi,
China.
Towards the end of 2019 , JP (Ethiopia) Textile Company plans to make additional
investment of not less than $22 million to expand its existing fabric mill and to add a
brand new garment factory to its portfolio of investments in Ethiopia. In doing so, JP
(Ethiopia) Textile Company will expand its total fabric production capacity from |'I million
yards in 2017 to 26 million yards in 2019 with. By the end of 2019, the company expects
to increase its export to $60 million.
" HEE N
is) TAL Apparel
or almost 70 years, TAL Apparel has been the pioneer in manufacturing garments.
With more than 26,000 employees and an annual turnover of more than $850 million
(2015), it currently is a world leader in producing technologically advanced garments
that combine superior styles, comfort and functionality. TAL supplies over 80 prestigious
fashion labels including Brooks Brothers, Burberry, Charles Tyrwhitt, JCPenney, |. Crew, L. L.
Bean, Nordstrom and Tommy Hilfiger. TAL is a pioneer company in innovation, inventor
of Sof TAL more than 20 years ago (a technology that makes garments resist pilling,
shrinkage, color fading) as well as PuckerFree( make garments from puckering), EZ
*Wash (eliminates collar and cuff stains), and Inno*Band (enhances expandable,
streamlined waistband). In addition to its garment manufacturing segment, TAL also
supplies Replenishment Solutions and production capacity and materials.
TAL plans to invest over $18 million within HIP in the next five years. It currently occupies 6
sheds. TAL manufactures various wearing and apparel, in particular shirts, which it supplies
to Jespeni (USA). TAL provided various types of training, including a training provided in
Indonesia for its middle management staff and about 200 operators. TAL has exported its
first shipment from the park.
| A ASTEMA
ERAT IRNAL
Arvinp
part of the Arvind Ltd group founded in 1931 with its headquarter in Gujarat,
India. With a market capital of $1.3 billion and over 100 years of rich business
experience, Arvind Ltd. is one of the oldest and most respected conglomerates in India.
The Group has varied business interests, ranging from textiles, retail and advanced
materials, to environmental solutions and real estate. Arvind today is synonymous with a
vast range of lifestyle products - be it fabrics or brands. Arvinds business divisions bring
in the best technology and expertise to produce some of the finest fabrics and exacting
dresses for some of the world's most quality conscious brands.
A rvind Lifestyle Apparel Manufacturing PLC, investing in Ethiopia since 2015, is a
The group employees more than 25,000 personnel across the globe and has an annual
revenue of more than $770 million. it manufactures cotton shirting, denim, knits and
bottom-weights (Khakis) fabrics and carrying internationally acclaimed brands such as
Lee, Wrangler, Arrow and Tommy Hilfiger including its own domestic brands. Arvind is
currently India's largest denim manufacturer and the worlds fourth-largest producer and
exporter of denim.
In Ethiopia, Arvind has already been producing and exporting high quality garments from
the Bole Lemi Industrial Park since 2015. Within HIP Arvind has over 60,000 square
meters of production area across seven sheds. Arvind will maintain a broad product
portfolio including denim and non-denim trousers, shirts, underwear as well as special and
industrial garments made from advanced materials. The company currently manufactures
mens shirt it supplies to PVH. In the medium to long term, Arvind plans to enter into
other areas of the textile and garment value chain to increase its footprint in Ethiopia.
When fully operational, Arvind has an ambitious plan of providing employment for over
10,000 individuals and boost its exports up to USD 100 million per year.
Hirdaramani
Garment Plc
Lanka, and has more than 100 years of experience under its belt. The Company
employees 60,000 workers across six continents in six industry segments.
Hirdaramani Garment PLC is the world leader in garment manufacturing. It is a pioneer
in the garments industry and through continuous product innovation and maintenance
of the stringent quality standards that the company is renowned for; it is the preferred
choice for leading international brands such as Marks & Spencer, Tesco, True Religion,
Levi's, Ralph Lauren and Tommy Hilfiger. The group boasts 35 production facilities across
Sri Lanka, Vietnam and Bangladesh and a capacity of 15 million pieces per month. It
provides a complete product range of knit and woven garments from casual wear to
jeans, sleepwear, lounge sportswear and underwear, encompassing all segments  women,
men and children.
| | irdaramani Garment is a part of the Hirdaramani Group, headquartered in Sri
Hiradaramani occupies two factory sheds and has already commenced production,
currently producing polo t-shirts and various underwear that it supplies to H&M and San
Mar, two global brand giants. Over the past few months, it has exported 25 containers of
shipment from HIP
BUSA PPAREL
GROUP
Busana Apparel
Group
turnover of more than $300 million USD in sales. It operates world-class factories
in various locations in Java, Indonesia, with more than 25,000 employees, providing
services from product design to manufacturing and supplying garments to several leading
brands in USA, Europe, Japan and Australia. With over 20 factories Busana Apparel Group
has become one of the largest garment manufacturers and exporters in South East Asia.
Busana also provides strong R&D support with in-house product development concept,
vertical fabric sourcing, innovative specialty products using automation in Down Filling,
seam-sealing, bonding etc. Its current production capacity can handle 47 million pieces per
year and is still looking to capture its expansion potentials.
Bi Apparel Group, established in 1975, is an Indonesian company with current
Its investment at HIP is Busanas newest investment and has rented sheds with a size of
22,000 m2 total area. The company has already commenced production and supplies
various types of shirts to PVH.
Indochine
International
fashion forward global sourcing partner with the capability to do itall.......... and
Ars
Indochine International, founded in 2004, is a Chinese-based firm with its headquarter in
Hangzhou, China. It has more than 5000 factory staffs and over [000 support personnel
worldwide. It operates a vertical supply chain for the sourcing, manufacturing and designing
of clothing and apparel. Indochine excels in the design, sourcing, manufacture and supply
of wide variety of apparel products such as, woven, lingerie jersey, denim, knitwear,
sportswear, out wear, tailoring and accessories. In its investments inside HIP Indochine
occupies an | 1000 m2 shed and has already commenced production of pantsuits, bras
and underwear which it supplies to PVH & New Look.
sabella (Pvt) Limited and Sarasavi Export (Pvt) Ltd is a conglomerate company based
in Sri Lanka. It is one of the largest and oldest socks and hosiery manufacturing and
ISABELLA exporting private company in Sri Lanka with an operating and manufacturing experience
of more than 30 years under its belt. With annual production volume of 60 million units of
@ socks, tights and pantyhose per annum and exporting mainly to Europe and US, it is South
Samanavi xeon Asia's second largest socks and hosiery manufacturing entity.
Inside its HIP investment, Isabella produces various types of sock and related products
Isabella and Sarasavi that are exported to USA and Europe. Isabella is poised to do its first export shipment
Export (Pvt) Ltd in June, 2017.
em
EPIC
manufactures in the world. It currently operates eleven wholly owned facilities
producing in excess of 70 million garments annually. It employs 20,000 associates and
generates indirect employment for an additional 20,000. It is a specialist in woven tops and
bottoms and known for its Innovation and Quality. The company partner with the finest
brands and retailers in the world. It is a recognized and award winning entity in Corporate
Social Responsibility Leader:
 PIC Group is a Hong Kong- based company and one of the fastest growing apparel
At HIF EPIC occupies two sheds with the size of | 1,000 m? , each and currently produces
pants. The company has made its first export from the park.
WILE BEB TE
a= Qu)
| WINN =
Zr
in 4 countries with a total of 16 manufacturing, printing and embroidery
plants with over [00 million units of apparel produced annually and a total
of 8,000 employees. Hela is involved in design and product development, offering
innovative apparel solutions and supply of clothing and accessories including casual,
intimate, kids and athleisure wear.
; The company has an extensive customer base including Levi's, Jockey, Soma, Warners,
Hela Clothing Group OYSHO, Superdry, Calvin Klein, DECATHLON, George, F&F, NIKE, M&S, H&M,
Michael Kors and TORRID.
| | ela Clothing Group is a British owned apparel manufacturing group operating
eTeAM ONewision Owe ETHIOP:
Onfex~
with its headquarter in Aalst, Belgium. It sells and distributes personal hygiene
products in more than 110 countries through leading retailer brands, as well
as under its own brands. With over 8000 employees and over 1.7bln revenue (2015)
it is one of the worlds leading suppliers of personal hygiene products.
Ontex has installed cutting-edge technologies that manufacture diapers for babies and
seniors in a fully automated manner. The company is expected to have an optimized
production rate of 504,000 pieces/ day.
O ntex manufactures, is a Belgian company established in 1979 in Buggenhout,
We've chosen Hawassa Industrial Park to build our new production plant because
we feel this is the optimal location to further expand our African activities and
accelerate our global growth strategy. HIP offers great logistic solutions, lots of space
for warehousing and an overall strategic location within Ethiopia and East-Africa, as
well as a strong support from the government, including tax and duties preferences.
Charles Bouaziz, CEO
EVERLEK
The Ultimate Innovalor
an annual turnover of more than $256milion and more than 3500 employees
in Taiwan, Thailand and China, it operates a vertically integrated production line
from yarn, weaving, knitting, dyeing, processing, to a garment factory and currently
operates the largest specialized textile mills in Taiwan.
Form founded in 1988, is a Taiwanese company based in Tainan. With
Everest supplies to global buyers including Nike, North Face, Columbia, lululemon
athletica, Decathlon, Patagonia, Gap, Ralph Lauren, Eddie Bauer Under Armour
Abercrombic & Fitch.
Through its investment at HIP the company manufactures garments for the companys
brand name customers from Europe. Everest implements a Toyota Way and lean
production standards in its management system. This helps the company to monitor,
control, optimize and improve performance and yield significantly.
At full capacity Everest plans to register a total production and export turnover of
more than $120million and create job opportunities to more than 8,000 employees.
Everest, whose customers include North Face Inc, Columbia Sportswear Co.
Decathlon Group, is highly regarded in the industry for its adherence to sustainable
production methods.
*
&
CHARGEURS
FASHION TECHNOLOGIES
Chargeurs Fashion
Technologies
Technologies is the world leader in interlining manufacturing. With 8 factories,
more than 850 employees and 25 sales offices worldwide, it has more than
$180mn in annual turnover ($575m for the whole Chargeurs group). The company
offers global supply solutions and technical assistance adapted to the sourcing needs of all
brands. Its popular brands such as Lainiere de Picardie, DH], Bertero and Intissel, provide
the full range of interlining, offering quality solutions for all fashion applications. It also
works with other major global brands including Chanel, Zara, PVH, Ralph Lauren, VF Corp,
Hugo Boss and H&M.
| |Femaees in France, and part of the Chargeurs Group, Chargeurs Fashion
Through its investment inside HIP, Chargeurs will manufacture various types of interlinings
which would be supplied to global brand manufacturers such as PVH.
Quadrant Apparel
The Quadrant Apparel group is a joint venture formed by a Spanish company which has a
solid vision to be the reference company in Africa for quality apparel production!
The JV partner SENCILLEZ has been in the industry for the last |0 years providing
sourcing service for the famous brands in Europe, Asia, North Africa and South America.
Environmental friendly working processes and social care for employees are values deeply
held by the company. As a result, the company is able to offer best value for money for
its international customers.
The state -of -the -art technologies and machineries have been integrated with a
management team trained in Europe with real production experience. In addition, a long-
term supervision from European apparel engineers will help instill best practices in the
companys value chain.
Jiangsu Golden Island
of Jiangsu province, China. We are a growing business with the biggest chain
stores of European and American customers.
(5 olden Island Group was established 20 years ago, located in Nanjing, capital
Golden Island Group now owns 7 modern factories all around the world including
China, and other countries in Asia employing a total of 5,000 workers. Our annual
turnover is around $150 Million in 2016. We are mainly engaged in developing and
producing various kinds of woven garments, good at handling products like Jackets,
Shirts, Cargo Pants and Shorts etc.
We highly understand that superior quality and prompt delivery are mandatory for
our customers, so we focus on producing high quality goods as well as maintaining
decent production efficiency. In addition, we are continuously focused on improving
our machinery and workmanship as well as implementing better production
arrangement, to ensure our capacity having a favorable and steady growth.
IRC RLATICN R[F LENT
Best Corporation
Private Ltd
company, established in the year 1967 in Tirupur, State of Tamil Nadu in India,
having operations across the spectrum including spinning, knitting, processing
and garmenting.
Re Corporation Private Limited (BCPL) is an integrated textile manufacturing
BCPL currently employs approximately 9,000 people and is one of the largest
exporters of knitted garments from Tirupur. BCPL owns three spinning mills with an
installed capacity of 100,000 spindles, and a dyeing house with processing capacity of
8 tons /day of knitted fabric and 5 garment manufacturing plants with 3000 machines.
BCPLs energy requirements are carbon neutral as entire energy consumption is
generated through wind & solar power.
BCPL produces knitted garments for the global market and specializes in underwear
and baby wear and caters to international brands such as Hanes Inc USA,
Kirkland Signature, Champion, C&A, Mothercare, Next, Tu Sainsbury's, ASDA and
DESTINATION XL.
FCI (BD) Ltd
FCI Talisman
(FCI group)
The Group consists of four companies: FCI (BD) Ltd, Talisman Ltd, Alliance Stitches
Ltd and FCI Clothing Ltd. The company started from a small operation in London
where it produced the iconic Burberry trench and duffle coats. Since then its business
has expanded to manufacturing for other brands such as Liz Claiborne, Jaques Vert,
Windsmoor & Alexon. The companys offshore expansion began by setting up factories in
Morocco in 1992 and Bangladesh in 1997 and now Ethiopia.
T= FCI Group is a privately owned, UK-based company established since 1980.
FClis known for producing high quality garments, ranging from soft tailoring to structured
formal outerwear for Global Brands. The company is known for the highest compliance
standards, use of state-of-the art manufacturing facilities and world class technical know-
how. FCl is, for instance, the first fully Nike compliant factory in Bangladesh and the
first to produce Nike football jerseys. It manufactures a wide range of soft-tailored and
structured formal outerwear for many of the world's top brands, including Calvin Kline,
H&M, Zara, Nike, Marks and Spencer, Sainsburry, Gerryweber, C&A, Benetton and Alexon.
The company employs 10,000 people and has an annual turnover of USD 175 Million.
ETAFFORD
 
2
Profile of HIP 3
TITTY
mgm
a=  ===
=~
MEIC
ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
thItRS KANO heady
Ministry of Industry
Ethiopian Textile Industry
Development Institute
/ 4 IPIA
Hawassa Industrial Park
Investors Association
ETCAMA
Ethiopian Textile and Garment
Manufacturers Association