   

  
FEDERAL NEGARIT GAZETTE
OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
    
      .
     
23" Year No.93
ADDIS ABABA, 15" September 2017
  5/
CONTENT
Regulation No 417/2017
Industrial Parks Council of Ministers Regulation
cotinine  OOS
     /
     / 
      
-  GER)    
" 3. 
   /2'   
. -
8/ *"     
/ 
/     
/      
 '    
 '
Be :
_ Unit Price * 18 55
Council of Ministers Regulation No 417/2017
COUNCIL OF MINISTERS REGULATION ON
INDUSTRIAL PARKS
This Regulation is issued by the Council of Minister
pursuant to Article 5 of the Definition of Powers and Duties of
the Executive Organs of the Federal Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia Proclamation No. 916/2015 and Article 32(1) of the
Industrial Parks Proclamation No. 886/2015.
SECTION ONE
2
1. Short Title
This Regulation may be cited as the Industrial Parks
Council of Ministers Regulations No. 417/2017.
2. Definitions
In this Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires:
1/ Proclamation means the Industrial Parks Proclamation
No. 886/2015;
2/ ' Investment Proclamation means the Investment
Proclamation No. 769/2012, (as amended);
 3/ Board means the Ethiopian Investment Board; -
4/ Commission means the Ethiopians Investment
Commission; os ey 
--   ... TE
Negarit 6. P.0. Box 80001
 3
         .
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 88.15 September 2017... page 010
 / 
 ""    
 
5/  '     bP
.  -   
8/ -    
   (  
/     (8)  (5) 
8/     
/    
.    
5/ Corporation means the Industrial Parks Development
Corporation established pursuant to the Council of
Ministers Regulation No. 326/2014;
6/ Authority means the Ethiopian Revenues and Customs
Authority;
7
Certificate of Origin means a document issued by a
competent authority in the country of production
certifying the authenticity of the origin of goods;
8
=~
Industrial Park End-User means any industrial park
developer, operator, enterprise, employee or resident;
Customs Procedure includes all customs operations
carried out by the persons concerned and the Authority
in order to ensure compliance with customs law;
9
10/ Customs Control means any lawful measure applied
by the Authority to ensure compliance with customs
law;
11/ Infrastructure means provision of electricity, water,
telecom including voice, video, data and other
related services, installation of a system for the
disposal of solid waste, liquid waste and reduction of
air pollution in an industrial park and includes
construction of roads and other necessary structures
within a park;
12/ without prejudice to the definitions provided under
sub-articles (1) to (6) of this Article, other terms and
expressions used in these Regulations shall have the
meaning attributed to them in the definitional
provisions of the Proclamation;
13/ any expression in the masculine gender includes the
feminine.
3. Main Duties of the Board
The Board, with the view to implementing the Proclamation
and this Regulation, shall have the following main duties:
1/ provide high-level guidance for the development, |
operation, and management of industrial parks and
institution building and control;
2/ designate industrial parks, make amendments to and
cancel the designation;
3/ decide on policy matters regarding industrial park
end-users and follow up the implementation of its
decisions;
4/ ensure that the concerned government organs,
through cooperation and coordination, put in place a
sustainable system as regards one-stop shops 9917
5/ adopt strategies and studies that enable to create and
75
 .         . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15" September 2017
9917
San page
.     
 -   
12
expand new productive capacity, as well as attract
and recruit domestic investors to industrial parks,
support them, create multi-faceted, sustainable inter-
linkages of inputs, and ensure transfer of knowledge
and skill within parks; : :
6/ ensure that a suitable complaint handling mechanism
is put in place to resolve dispute arsing in relation to
industrial parks. 
4. Main Duties of the Commission
a,    
i.  TCh   
~
;
-
     -
'
El   
   -
  -
-    
/-     
  .  
The Commission, with the view to implementing the
Proclamation and these
following main duties:
Regulations, shall have the
1/ recruit suitable investors that can engage in the
. development of industrial parks;
2/ recruit suitable domestic and foreign investors that
can engage in the manufacturing sector, conclude
agreements with them and ensure full occupancy of
industrial parks by manufacturing enterprises;
3/ ensure that industrial park enterprises get
streamlined one-stop shop service within the
industrial parks;
4/ develop in consultation with the Ministry of Industry
and facilitate adoption by the Board of strategies and
studies that help create and expand new productive
capacity, attract and support domestic investors to
industrial parks, create multi-faceted, sustainable
inter-linkages of inputs, and ensure transfer of
knowledge and skill within parks and implement
such strategies once adopted;
5/ provide to industrial park enterprises logistical and
export support;
6/ ascertain that land is prepared and designated as
industrial park; ensure lease and sub-lease
agreements are concluded, construction permits are
granted in accordance with the system in place;
ensure that infrastructure is developed as per the
plans, provided properly and utilised for production
and provision of associated services;
7/ ensure that the rights of industrial park end-users are
respected and their obligations discharged;
. 8/ facilitate conditions necessary for industrial park
enterprises, industrial park developers or operators to
gain legal personality and to engage with the
Government, 85 the case may be, organised
continuous dialogues;
.
 LY =
 ##2
        BAT . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15% September 2017 9918
eave page
Bl    - 
  ]
8/    
.   
 RE ([)  -   |
     ) 
-  
)   
)     
)   - 
9/ conduct studies to identify policy issues of relevance
to industrial park end-users, submit and cause
decision of the Board and implement same;
10/ coordinate the responsibilities of relevant bodies
with regard to recruitment and training of industrial
park workforce, and enhance work morale of
workers of industrial park enterprises at plant-level
by making use of community radio transmission and
other means of communication;
11/ submit to the Board and other relevant bodies up-
to-date reports containing necessary data and
analysis bout industrial park end-users land
development and construction performance,
utilisation of factory and other buildings,
manufacturing and export trade performance,
employment status of domestic and foreign workers,
one-stop shop service delivery and other important
information.
SECTION TWO
DESIGNATION OF INDUSRIAL PARK AND
INVESTMENT PERMIT
5 . Designation of an Industrial Park
1/ The Corporation or any other investor that wants to
develop an industrial park shall apply to the
Commission for the designation of an undeveloped
or a developed land as an industrial park.
2/ The application for designation shall consider the
provision of Article 25(2) the Proclamation,
3/ Without prejudice to the provision of the
Proclamation and sub-article (2) of this Article, the
application for the designation of an industrial park
shall demonstrate the following:
a) creation of job opportunities for citizens;
b) transfer of knowledge, skill and technology;
6) potential to increase export;
d) backward and forward linkages of input;
) contribution to national and regional -
infrastructure development and
6 Availability of human resource necessary for an
industrial park.
4/ The Board may determine the minimum size of land
to be designated as an industrial park in light of the
peculiarities of each project.
 : AN LETT
i J
]
9919
     2     .. Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15"' September 2017...... page
#/       5/ The land to be used for factory building, facilities for
     common use, infrastructure, residence and related
  -  buildings within the industrial parks area shall
   hi    neither be less than 50 per cent nor exceed 75
      percent of the land under possession; provided,
      however, that the Board may decide otherwise, in
     LE that Conse the environment, whore at
    .  application is submitted to develop into an industrial
i park land that is suitable neither for agriculture nor
   for pasture.
      6/ The Commission shall asses the application for
     designation and submit its recommendation to the
Board within thirty days.
Z/      
/  TCR    
)  
TAR   
 "  
/     (8)  
'.      
7/ The Board shall, based on the recommendation of
. the Commission, determine the size of land
designated as an industrial park and its lease price
and decide that the same be transferred to the
selected industrial park developer.
8/ An industrial park developer shall submit the
following ~~ documents before
construction: :
commencing
8) an economic feasibility study document
prepared by the industrial park developer; a
park development plan and hydrological
study;
b) evidence of financial capacity;
6). Letters from pertinent governmental
institutions indicating the social and
environmental impact assessment reports of
the project have been considered and giving
their go ahead for the project.
9/ The Commission shall notify the applicant in writing
of the Board's decision within seven official working
days.
6 Designation of a Specialised Industrial Park
1/ The Board may, where appropriate, designate an
industrial park as specialising in textile and apparel,
integrated agro-processing, technology,
pharmaceuticals, metalworking or any other
specialised field.
2/ Without prejudice to sub-article (1) of this Article,
the Board may designate an area as a free trade park
or export processing zone in which goods may be
landed, handled, manufactured or reconfigured, and
re-exported or supplied as input for industrial parks
in consultation with the Authority.
 BETA
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15 September 2017....... page 9920
/ PAR    
.    NAA
-  . -  
-   
)    
)]   
/      (8)  (8
 .    
8/      
 )    
 . 
/     . 
   - . 
3/ The application for a specialised designation may be
made by the Commission or the Corporation or
another industrial park developer.
4/ Without prejudice to Article 5 of these Regulations,
the application for a specialised designation shall
clearly demonstrate the following information:
a) such a designation contributes to the attainment
of special developmental goals of the region or
locality;
b) the importance of such designation in enhancing
competitiveness through creation of linkages
among enterprises in the park;
6) the suitability of the locality chosen for the
supply of input.
- 5/ The Board may grant special incentives to a park
designated as a specialised industrial park pursuant
to sub-article (1) to (4) of this Article.
7. Investment Permit of an Industrial Park Developer
1/ Any domestic or foreign investor shall apply to the
Commission and secure an investment permit in
order to become industrial park developer.
2/ Industrial park developer shall comply with the
following requirements for the issuance of
investment permit:
a) an undertaking is made to develop a park for
use by industrial park enterprises that engage
in special manufacturing sectors identified as
priority by the Government;
b) [6 applicant demonstrates availability of
sufficient capital for the implementation of
the project and
) other requirements for the issuance of
investment permit provided for under the
investment law.
3/Where the Commission finds the application comply
the requirements, it shall conclude a memorandum of
understanding with the applicant and issue an
investment permit to the industrial park developer
within seven official working days.
4/The investment permit issued to an industrial park
developer shall indicate the investment sector on
which the park focuses.
8. Investment Permit of an Industrial Park Operate
Commission and secure an investment permit to
become an industrial park operator.
 25     AF    
5.. - Federal Negarit Gazette No, 88 15" September 2017...... page ]
     |
/  .  
5      
      )
2.    
2/ An industrial park operator shall comply with the
following requirements for the issuance of investment
permit:
5) detailed declaration demonstrating availability
of professionals and possession of experience in
rendering similar or related service;
b) administrative and financial plan demonstrating
availability of funds and capacity to deploy
sufficient experienced professionals; and
6) Other requiremenis for the issuance of
3/ The Commission shall issue investment permit to the
applicant within seven official working days where
it finds that the application complies with the
requirements,
4/ An industry park developer, who seeks to operate
industrial park that he developed, shall apply for
investment permit to operate the park upon
complying with the requirements provided under
sub-article (2) of this Article.
S. Investment Permit of an Industrial Park Enterprise
&      
  -  
)      
1/ Any domestic or foreign 16816 shall apply to the
order to become an industrial park enterprise.
2/ An industrial park enterprise shall comply with the
investment perrnit:
a) detailed project proposal;
5) export or import substitution plan depending on
the type of the project;
6) declaration of financial standing and a ten-year
forecast;
d) environmental impact assessment report and
4
69) Other requirenients for the issuance of
investment law,
it tinds the application complies with 6
requirements.
|
668: : :.225 wa
62 18
       2    BAT . Federal Negarit Gazette No, 83 15 September 2017....... page 2
  SECTION THREE :
     TRANSFER OF LAND AND CONSTRUCTION i
2.        10. Land Leasehold Certificate of Industrial Park
     .
8/      1/ The Corporation shall, as provided under Article
5(2) of iis establishment Regulation No. 326/2014,
keep in the land bank the land that it obtains from
Regions through agreement with and get a site plan
to develop by it or to transfers to other industrial
park developers. The agreement shall be reached to
 (&) (8)  - 
      enable the Corporation to develop such land by
     itself or transfer the same in leasehold to another 
  industrial park developer. |
/    -   (6) 2/ With regard to the land it has received pursuant to |
     sub-article (1) of this Article, the Corporation shall, |
     as regards land that it seeks to develop itself, secure |
       lease-hold certificate that enables it to do so from
   an appropriate regional institution.
.     3/ The Corporation shall transfer land in leasehold from
the land bank to another industrial park developer
 .  -  ; ;
that has secured investment permit only after the
    -  Commission notifies it of the decision of the Board
     to that effect. Following the conclusion of such
      leasehold, the industrial park developer shall get
     lease-hold certificate from the Commission.
8/      4/ The Commission shall issue certificate of sub-
     leasehold to an industrial park enterprise that has
     acquired a developed industrial park land on the |
     APPA: basis of sub-lease from the Corporation or another |
-     industrial park developer. |
 |
6.       | 11. Construction by Industrial Park Developer or Enterprise
 ] 1/ An industrial park developer that wishes to carry out
construction of a factory building or engage in any
other construction permissible in a park for rent or
sale shall secure a construction permit from the
Commission. The Commission shall seek
professional assistance from the Corporation or
.      
=
      ! another appropriate institution in the course of
     discharging this responsibility. :
/      2/ An application for a construction permit by an
     industrial park developer shall clearly show with the |
 following requirements: |
)      a) that the land to be used for factory building and
      related construction in the park complies with
()      the requirements under Article 5 (5) of this
Regulation;
      3     . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15 September 2017........ page 9923
)       5) inclusion of facilities for, one stop-shop service,
     medical service, residential buildings, sport
      centre, green area, and the like sufficiently in
    manner accessible to persons with disability; -
) Inclusion of adequate fire prevention and fightin
41]. AEF   -    facilities, En and systems 
   .... for security, customs control and cargo
     examination, parking, loading and unloading
    space, weighbridge, stores, offices, human and
      factory waste treatment facility.
/      3/   a shall Gel
Be  & - agreement wi 6 Commission regarding the
Spa  20 ST implementation of the construction of its project.
=  4/ An industrial park enterprise shall conclude an
of      agreement regarding the implementation of factory
    and related construction with the industrial park
     developer or an operator designated by the industrial
     park developer.
a 5/ The Commission shall grant construction permit,
/     [)  () other permits related to construction, and examine
 -    and approve bill of quantities following the
       conclusion of agreements indicated under sub-
     articles (3) and (4) of this Article.
I   =  1. 6/ An industrial park 166 or enterprise that
4 a wn  = oe wishes to make changes to construction that was
fey Go yp pls Sonn: pa carried out in compliance with the agreement sad
" > as appropriate, seek the approval of the Commission
     or industrial park developer.
/      7/ The Commission shall oversee and ensure that the
     implementation of the project of the industrial park
       or factory and related construction of an
      conforms - i ie ne
 ommission ma ischarge ese regulatol
Hedy     ead responsibilities el use 2. own 
      or those of the Corporation or by hiring a consulting
 | firm,
wo '
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15 September 2017........ page 2224
hea 
&    
    -
|    
   :
. /     
Ff    
SECTION FOUR
CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH INDUSTRIAL
PARK DEVELOPER, OPERATOR AND
ENTERPRISE UNDERTAKE THEIR
INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES
12. Conditions under which an Industrial Park Developer
Develops a Park =
Without prejudice the provisions of the Proclamation, an
industrial park developer shall have the following
responsibilities:
1/ provide facilities that are necessary during
construction stage such as for first aid; #pafeterias,
toilets, and ensure the security and well-being of
construction workers;
2/ carry out construction of buildings, develop
infrastructure and service facilities in compliance
with the requirements of these Regulations, terms of
the investment permit and agreement in a timely and
adequate manner;
3/ include buildings and facilities to be used for the
provision of certification service regarding product
quality and other requirements taking into account
the investment sector on which the park focuses;
4/ transfer experience gamered regarding park
development to Ethiopians; :
5/ submit detailed quarterly report to the Commission
regarding performance of the project particularly the
performance of the ifidustrial park land development
and construction activities within the park, use of
factory and other buildings.
13. Conditions under which an Industrial Park Operator
Operates a Park
industrial park operator shall have responsibility to ensure
the following:
17 activities in the park are carried out in compliance
with the relevant laws and terms of the operator
agreement;
2/ administration of the park is in conformity with
reasonable trade practice;
3/ provision of service in the park without
discrimination;
    IE  &   . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 88 15 September 2017......... page
9925
1=]
15)
/       
8     
) -  
  - 
5/     
B  |    
" 
El     
4/ activities are carried out in compliance with by laws
developed in consultation with the association of
industrial park enterprises, in particular:
a) modifications to buildings comply with
relevant laws;
b) movement of people and vehicles inside the
park and at the gates is streamlined;
) parking space and cargo terminals are properly
utilised;
d) adequate security is provided inside the park
and its surrounding;
) fire and accident prevention and control
system is in place and readily available for
use;
6 removal of liquid and solid waste and
cleanliness of common spaces is ensured;
g) develop common space and green areas and
look after them;
h) properly maintain and preserve infrastructure,
ensure that they are in working order;
5/ conclusion of agreement with third parties for
provision of certain services;
ensure security within the park, where need be, by
calling upon government security forces for
support;
make use of modern technological means to secure
| the industrial park in ways that are suitable to
users and implementation of customs laws;
5
transfer to Ethiopians of knowledge and skill in
regard to administration of an industrial park;
"9/ submission of detailed quarterly report to the
Commission regarding the discharge of its duties
particularly the performance of the industrial park
land development and construction activities
within the park, use of factory and other buildings.
14. Conditions under which an Industrial Par Enterprise
Carries on Investment
Without prejudice to the provisions of the Proclamaticen,
an industrial park enterprise shall have the following
1/ put in place a system for work conditions,
. productivity and particularly provide access to
 #8.         
99 Federal Negarit Gazette No. 88- 15" September 2017 9926
|     
|  
     i
,
:  
fl)     
)       
health care coverage, day care, cafeterias, and
where appropriate, transportation;
2/ submit annual report fo the relevant governmental -
institutions regarding activities carried out to
transfer to Ethiopians knowledge and skill;
3/ submit annually to the Commission information
regarding its employees, based on a format to be
prepared by the Commission in consultation with
pertinent governmental institutions;
4/ submit monthly report to the Commission on its
performance, particularly as regards production and
export.
SECTION FIVE .
ONE-STOP SHOP SERVICE AND RELATED
MATTERS
5. One-stop Shop Service
1/An industrial park developer, operator or enterprise
that has been issued investment permit by the
Commission shall have access to the following one-
stop shop services at a park level:
a) renewal, amendment, change or replacement of
investment permit or issuance of investment
permit for expansion of investment project;
b) change or amendment of commercial registration
or issuance of substitute
certificate
commercial registration;
of
) issuance and renewal of business license, or
issuance of substitute business license; '
d) amendment or change of the name of a business
organisation;
6) registration of trade name, giving substitute trade
name, amendment of trade name certificate or its .
cancellation;
f) registration and renewal of registration of the
association of industrial park enterprises;
g) registration of foreign direct capital;
h) issuance and renewal of visa, issuance and
renewal of residence permit;
i) issuance of work permit, its renewal, replacement
and cancellation;
j) approval of exemption from customs duty and
franco valuta importation of goods;
k) approval of income tax holiday;
. 3
1
    AE    ELT .
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 88 15" September 2017......... page 9927
T)     
      AA
- 
)    hee: 
CR)      
0)      
) - -  
]  . 
m
n
Rad
6)
p)
q)
)
5)
0
9)
<=
x)
7)
receipt and entertainment of requests for transfer
of construction materials, capital goods, spare
parts and motor vehicles from an industrial park
enterprise entitled to exemption from customs
duty to another enterprise with the same -
entitlement within a single industrial park;
authentication ~~ of ~~ documents including
memorandum of association, articles 
association and amendments thereto;
issuance of tax identification number to
employees in the industrial park 380
communication of decisions regarding income
tax holiday to expatriate employees;
registration of industrial park enterprises for
value added tax, refund of value added tax,
granting permits and rendering services such as
in relation to implementation of voucher and
other export incentives;
provision of declaration of tax, payment of tax,
tax refund, tax audit and other services pertaining
to tax;
conduct of registrations pertaining to employers,
and workers;
issuance of certificate of origin and other
supporting certificates necessary to benefit from
special market opportunities;
approval of environmental impact assessment
studies and issuance of certificate;
issuance of a certificate of competence, and other
certificates required in the marketing of products,
where necessary,
provision of banking, insurance, shipping,
logistical and other services of relevance to the
park;
issuance of certificate of residence to industrial
park residents;
collection of contributions from employers and
employees to the private organisations pension
fund; :
follow up and give support regarding the safety
and health of workers in relation to work;
Handling complaints and resolving disputes or
creating conducive condition for resolution of
disputes by appropriate organs, especially using
alternative dispute resolution methods.
 882.          .
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15 September 2017....... page 9928
ps
F/     
 Pod:   (
   )  
-.        
-     
       
'     
 -  0) ,   
(#01)      
2/ All relevant government organs that are required to
give service to industrial park end-users shall have
duty to provide service cither presence in the one-
stop shop service or designate the Commission or
another appropriate institution 10 provide such
service on their behalf within a park.
3/ An industrial park developer or operator shall, as
part of one-stop-shop service within each park,
provide water, electricity, telecom including voice,
video, data and other related services, remove liquid
and solid waste and other necessary services either
directly or through the instrumentality of a third
person.
4/ Governmental institutions that are responsible for
rendering one-stop shop service in the park shall set
up structure and detailed operational procedures that
take into account the nature of industrial parks.
5/Relevant government organs shall, under the
coordination of the Commission, conclude
agreement themselves with the view
integrating and making one-stop shop service
effective.
among
16. Visa and Residence Permit
yisd      
1/ The Commission may facilitate the processing of
visa and residence permit applications of foreign
citizens who come to Ethiopia in relation to
investment and that of their dependent family
members. 
2/ A foreign citizen who happens to be outside his
country of residence may apply for Ethiopian visa
from the third country where the reason for travel to
Ethiopia pertains to investment.
3/ A multiple entry visa, that is valid for 5 (five) years
or residence permit may be issued, based on an
assurance from the Commission, to an owner or
shareholder of an industrial park developer or
enterprise.
4/ A multiple entry visa, that is valid for 3 (three) years
assurance from the Commission, to 8 foreign
operator that works in an industrial park, to an
industrial park product buyer, worker, manager;
executive officer from head quarters, board member
or high level professional staff.
#
    IE     . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15" September 2017.......85- 72
2.  
58/    - 
.    7
pet
      |
, ,  
;  
5   - 
17. Issuance of Work Permit
1/ A work permit shall be issued by the Commission to
a foreign citizen to be employed by an industrial
park developer, operator or enterprises that has been
given investment permit in relation to an industrial
park.
2/ A work permit may be issued to the spouse of a
foreign industrial park worker who lives in Ethiopia.
18. Transfer of Knowledge, Skills and Technology
1/ The Ministry of Industry and other relevant organs
shall make sure that industrial parks recruit workers,
foster skills development and transfer, and transfer
and upgrading of technology; they shall also ensure
supply of input and creation of market linkage; and
render support in regard to the realization of these.
2/ The Ministry of Industry shall design training
programs that enable transfer of skills and
knowledge to Ethiopian workers; and support and
follow up to see it that an industrial park developer,
operator and enterprise provide the training.
3/ The Ministry of Industry shall, in collaboration with
relevant bodies, put in place mechanisms that
facilitate technology transfer; particularly, the
Ministry shall have the responsibility to foster
partnership between government and industrial park
enterprises with the view to enhancing the transfer
and advancement of technology, increase
productivity and quality of industrial products and
cause the conduct of studies and research.
4/ The Ministry of Industry shall cause institutes
accountable to open its branch offices, as may be
appropriate, within parks or assign experts in order
to discharge its responsibilities under the
Proclamation and these Regulations.
SECTION SIX
CUSTOMS PROCEDURE AS CONCERNS
INDUSTRIAL PARK
19. Customs Control
1/ All customs procedures shall be completed in an
2/ An industrial park may either in its entirety or partly
be a customs controlled area.
il
8..          .2" Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15 September 2017....... pag:
9930
"     
CI       
3/ Customs control in connection with industrial parks
shall be carried out at the entry and exit gates of the
customs territory as well as at the gates of the
industrial parks.
4/ Goods transported by an industrial park developer or
operator or enterprise to or from customs controlled
area of an industrial park shall be cleared by
simplified customs procedure.
5/ Cargo shipped by an industrial park enterprise from
port of entry into the customs territory to an
industrial park shall neither be stopped nor examined
en route. The goods shall, however, be sealed in a
container and the shipping documents that clearly
indicate the industrial park to which the cargo is
destined.
6/ An industrial park enterprise that has undertaken to
export its entire produce shall be exempted from any
customs duty and tax on raw materials it may import;
provided, however, where an industrial park
enterprise sells parts of its produce to the customs
territory, it shall be subject to appropriate customs
duty and tax on the difference.
7/ An industrial park enterprise that sells its products as
input to another industrial park enterprise that
exports its produce shall not be subject to payment of
customs duty and tax.
8/ Any enterprise located within the customs territory
that supplies input produced anywhere within the
country to an industrial park enterprise engaged in
export shall not be subject to payment of any
customs duty or tax on such transaction; an industrial
park enterprise that-exports products that it produced
using input that it purchased in the customs territory
shall also not be subject to payment of customs duty
and tax on the input used.
9/ An industrial park enterprise that has undertaken to
export its entire produce may keep up to one year
raw material that it imported without payment of
customs duty and tax. Where such enterprise
establishes good cause to retain such raw material for
a period exceeding one year, the Commission may
allow additional time..
10/ An industrial park enterprise that has undertaken to
export its entire produce may 05 under any
circumstance, sell its products within the customs 
territory; provided, however, it may under special
circumstances, if authorised by the Board, sell its
products within the customs territory subject to
 #"888
    2     .
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15 September 2017......... page 9931
ial      
. -
4 )    
| /     
4       
|      
||     
|.      
| 
|       
|    .  
|  .    
J    
|| 8/    
payment of appropriate customs duty and tax. -
11/ Where an industrial park enterprise that is required -
to export its entire produce provides proof that its |
products could not meet export standards or its |
produce has been sent back after being exported i
owing to defects:
a) may, after securing permission from the
Commission, sell such products at a special
sales event to be organised only twice per year
each for a continuous period not exceeding
one week within the park at a place designated
for such purpose, subject to payment of value
added tax or;
b) may donate such products to a charity lawfully
established within the country or;
) getrid of such products by other means.
12/ An industrial park enterprise may sell by-products
within the customs territory subject to the payment
of only value added tax. The value added tax due
from the enterprise shall be computed on the basis of -
the price at which the enterprise sells the by-
products.
13/ An industrial park developer or enterprise may, by
furnishing a letter of guarantee to the Authority, send
abroad defective, damaged or incomplete capital
goods, spare parts and accessories and have them
replaced or repaired; and the Authority may not
require any payment as regards this.
14/ Where customs duty or tax is not due on goods
imported franco valuta by an industrial park
developer or enterprise such goods may be sent
abroad by the industrial park developer or enterprise,
by securing permission from the Authority, without
making payments that are charged in relation to
goods sent back abroad.
15/ An industrial park enterprise may, by adducing
evidence to the Authority from a relevant
governmental institution, cause the removal of input
that has expired or is defective.
20. Violation of Customs Procedures
An industrial park end-user that violates the customs and
other laws shall be held accountable under the relevant law.
STEN Gum  =m Sl (ONE
rp ry
# = 
     3     .
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15" September 2017....... page
  )
: 
Pod     
SECTION SEVEN
COMPLAINT HANDLING AND DISPUTE
RESOLUTION
21. Principles
1/ Administrative complaints, civil and commercial
disputes that arise in an industrial park shall be
settled in efficient, effective and balanced manner.
2/ Complaints and collective or individual labour
disputes that arise between 8 worker and 15
employer in an industrial park shall be resolved
pursuant to the Labour Law by giving priority to
alternative dispute mechanism.
.  22. Administrative Measure
Bl    -
    . 
2 i
'/     
     (8) 
 (8)    
    - 
      23.
  : 
1/ Where an industria] park developer Of operator
violates the conditions for the issuance of its permit,
{hese Regulations, directives or other relevant laws,
the Board shall issue it a warning requiring that
cotrective measures be taken in less than sixty days;
a similar warning shall be issued by the Commission
 where the foregoing violation is committed by an
industrial park enterprise.
2/ Where an industrial park developer, operator Of
enterprise fails to take corrective measures within the
time limit provided for under sub-article (1) of this
Article, the Board, or as may be appropriate the
Commission, may suspend its permit for not more
than sixty days.
3/ Where an industrial park developer or operator oF
enterprise whose permit has been suspended fails to
take corrective measures and fails to resume work
within the time limit fixed pursuant (0 sub-article (2)
of this Article, the Board may decide that the matter
be referred to an appropriate body for a provisional
trustee that takes appropriate measures to preserve
the rights of third parties be appointed.
Lodging Complaint against Decision of the Commission
1/ Any industrial park end-user may lodge complaint
to the Board against administrative measures taken
by the Commission.
2/ The complaint against the decision or
administrative measure taken by the Commission
shall be made in writing; a copy of the decision or
measure taken by the Commission. shall be
submitted together with the pleading.
Where a party with vested interest requests that the
decision or administrative measure taken by the
Commission be given 10 it in writing, the
Commission shall give that within seven official
working days of the request.
3
a
         . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15" September 2017....... page
9933
9.    
/        
5.     
 -  
24. Appeal Against Decision of the Board
1/ A party aggrieved by a decision of the Board may
lodge appeal to an appropriate court.
2/ Where a complainant requests the copy of decision
of the Board be given to him in writing, the
Secretariat of the Board shall give it within seven
official working days of the request.
25. Complaints Lodged Against Other Government
Institutions
1/ An industrial park end-user may submit complaint
to the Commission against decisions made and
administrative measures taken by any other
government institution in relation to an industrial
/      (8)  --2/ The Commission may cause resolution of complaint
submitted pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article
- at each industrial parks one-stop shop service.
/     ()   3/ Where a complaint is submitted to the one-stop
     shop service for resolution pursuant to sub-article
     (1) of this Article, the Commission shall consult the
/    - 
 ; i th
|       4/ The parties shall be bound by the fein of the,
|    recommendation drawn up by the Commission only
|      . if they in writing confirm their acceptance.
|     heron    5/ The recommendations shall be deemed rejected, if
(8).  
/       3/
relevant parties and come up with a written
recommendation to solve the grievance, within
thirty days of the submission.
26. Conciliation
1/ The Commission shall cause resolution of disputes
arising between industrial park end-users through
negotiation at the one-stop shop service.
The service specified under sub-article (1) of this
Article shall be provided only if the parties to the
dispute agree to seek that and submit their request
in writing.
Where a request for conciliation service 15
submitted to the Commission, the conciliator at the
parties, if need be, and come up with a written final
recommendation to solve the dispute, within thirty
days of submission of the complaint.
all the parties to the dispute fail to in writing
confirm their acceptance of the terms of
recommendation within fifteen days from the time
such recommendations were made known to them.
- one-stop shop service shall consult the relevant
 8
9934
5.  
/   
  .  - 
/
/     (8) 
 -   . - 
..       
"   
  . 
:     
 AF    
6/ The parties shall settle expenses incurred in
connection with the conciliation; and they shall
undertake to do that beforehand.
27. Resolution by Arbitration
1/ Industrial park end-users may agree to resolve
disputes between themselves by arbitration.
2/ The agreement referred to under sub-article (1) of
this Article shall be concluded in writing; the
details shall be governed by Article 3325 and the
subsequent provisions of the Civil Code of
Ethiopia.
28. Roster of Professionals that may Serve as Arbitrators
1/ The Commission shall, based on the
recommendation of industrial park end-users,
compile a roster of credible professionals that can
serve as arbitrators.
2/ The Commission shall update the roster specified
under sub-article (1) of this Article biennially.
29. Appointment of Arbitrator
1/ Parties that have agreed
differences by arbitration may appoint as an
arbitrator a person that appears on the roster
specified under Article 28 of these Regulation or
any other person.
to resolve their
Where the arbitration agreement fails to specify
the number of arbitrators or the manner in which
they shall be appointed, each party shall appoint
one arbitrator.
Unless otherwise agreed, where there is an even
number of arbitrators, they shall, before assuming
their functions, appoint another arbitrator who
shall as of right preside over the arbitration
tribunal. Where the arbitrators fail to reach
agreement, the Arbitration Institute of Addis
Ababa Chamber of Commerce and Sectoral
Association shall, upon the request of one of the
parties to the dispute, appoint an arbitrator from
the roster specified under Article 28 of these
Regulations.
3/
4/ Where their number is odd, the arbitrators shall
appoint the presiding arbitrator from among
themselves. Where the arbitrators fail to reach
parties to the dispute, appoint the presiding
arbitrator from among the arbitrators.
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15" September 2017....... page 9935
|   -  
: :    
    .  
  '    
I     
   / 
'    
  '   
 '   (8)  
     --
30. Applicable Law
Industrial park end-users that have agreed to resolve their
differences by arbitration are at liberty to choose the
substantive and procedural law 10 be applied by the
tribunal.
31. Arbitrator Fee
The Commission shall, in consultation with appropriate
bodies, prepare arbitration rate of fee schedule to be
applied to determine fees due to arbitrators that resolve
disputes among industrial park end-users.
32. Assignment of Federal Court Circuit Bench
The Commission shall, in consultation with the Federal
Supreme Court, facilitate conditions for the assignment of
a circuit bench of appropriate federal court in industrial
parks.
SECTION EIGHT
MISCELLANEOUS PROV. ISIONS
33. Personal Effects
1/ A foreign investor engaged in an industrial park or
an Ethiopian that resides abroad or a person of
Ethiopian origin may import duty-free and without
paying other taxes personal effects such as those
used in living room, bedroom, kitchen, bathroom,
sports appliances, lap top and desk top computers,
musical instruments, camera, electronic gadgets,
TV, CD player, for use if he lives or works in an
industrial park; the details of which shall be
prescribed by a directive.
2/ A foreign investor engaged in an industrial park or
Ethiopian origin that has imported personal effects
pursuant to sub-article (1) of this Article may:
a) transfer such goods to another person
with similar rights without payment of
customs duty and tax;
b) Transfer such goods to another person
that does not have similar rights or take
them outside the park for his own use
subject to the payment of appropriate
. customs duty and tax in advance.
- 8885
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15 September 2017....... page 9936
T     [)  
  .   
    . , 
.  
/   -
 )     
     ), 
ak.    
5     
 -  --  
 bi
3/ A person who wants to transfer his rights pursuant
to sub-article (2) of this Article shall secure
approval of the Commission before effecting
transfer.
34. Exemption from Tax on Salary
Foreign nationals employed by an industrial park enterprise
that has undertaken to export its produce shall be exempted
from paying income tax on their salary during five
consecutive years starting from the date on which the
enterprise obtained business license.
35. Tripartite Committee
1/ A tripartite committee consisting of the Ministry. of
Labour and Social Affairs, the Ministry of Industry,
industrial park developer, operator or enterprise and
employees representatives shall be established in a
2/ The tripartite committee shall be responsible for:
a) ensuring the rights and duties of
workers are respected and creating
conducive conditions to prevent
conflict through continuous
consultation and engagement;
b) ascertaining, in consultation with the
Ministry of Industry, that transfer of
knowledge, skill and technology takes
place and productivity increases; 
6) Carrying out other activities that help
attain industrial peace.
3/ The Commission shall, in consultation with the
Ministry of Industry, follow up ahd provide
assistance that the Committee discharges the
responsibilities entrusted to it under sub-article
(2) of this Article; the Commission shall also
regulate the activities of the Committee.
36. Law Enforcement and Exchange of Information .
1/ The Commission shall cause cooperation 880.
enforcement bodies operate within industrial
parks with that of the industrial park developer,
operator or enterprise.
2/ Where a law enforcement organ or any another
relevant body comes to know of violation of the
terms of permit by an industrial park developer,
operator, enterprise Of manager or any (6
organ that initiates any investigation into such
matters, shall forthwith inform the Commission
about such violation or commencement of
investigations. EG =
coordination of appropriate security and law ..
PRES 
20224... 00)  .
Jil
iw
    girlfriend     .
9937
 Federal Negarit Gazette No. 83 15* September 2017...... page
85.  
AT    
,    
   : 
18.   
   4
37. Transitory Provisions
1/ Without prejudice to the provisions of other
appropriate laws, memorandums of understanding
concluded with industrial park developers,
operators and enterprises and decisions taken as
concerns industrial parks designated before the
coming into force of these Regulations shall
continue to apply.
2/ Provisions of this Regulation that confer better
rights on industrial park end-users shall be
applicable to industrial parks designated before
the coming into force of this Regulation.
38. Issuance of Directives
1/ The Commission shall, in consultation with
stakeholders draft directives, concerning:
designation of industrial park, permit,
construction, operation, one-stop shop service,
visa and residence permit, customs, export trade,
complaint handling and dispute resolution and
other matters of relevance to industrial park
cause them to be approved by the Board.
2/ The Commission or other pertinent governmental
institutions shall issue detailed implementation
directives enabling the enforcement of the
directives issued by the Board pursuant to sub-
article (1) of this Article. The Commission shall
follow-up and coordinates the issuance of such
directives  the appropriate governmental
institutions.
39. Inapplicable Laws
No regulation, directive and practice shall, in so far as it is
inconsistent with this Regulation, have force or effect with
respect to matters covered by this Regulation.
0. Entry into Force
This Regulation shall enter into force on the date of
publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
Done at Addis Ababa, this September, 15" day of
2017.
HAILEMARIAM DESSALEGN
PRIME MINISTER OF THE FEDERAL
DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
VE SA