Industrial Parks in Ethiopia

Incentives Package
ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
CAFERE AYAMFOVE hOLUY
CONTENTS
Why Invest in Ethiopia? 2
Industrial Parks 4
Industrial Parks Incentives 6
Income tax exemption in industrial parks 8
Customs duty and other tax exemption in industrial parks 9
Ease of access to industrial park space
10
Non-fiscal incentives
A a m Su
MR EME SRA TU ORAL,
AE AE RG 
7
win
5%
INDUSTRIAL PARKS IN ETHIOPIA  INCENTIVES PACKAGE 1
WHY INVEST IN ETHIOPIA?
Ethiopia has become a preferred destination for foreign direct investment and emerging hub for
manufacturing in Africa due to its:
Political stability and committed government
e Stable socio-economic governance with sustained peace and security.
 Ranked 34th /138 economies for impartial public decision making (Global Competitiveness
Report, 2016).
 Wide-ranging incentives package for priority sectors and export-oriented investments.
 Bold initiative in the development of state-of-the art industrial parks, electric-powered
railway connecting the capital and other economic corridors to the port of Djibouti.
Well developed infrastructure
Newly built Addis-Djibouti electric-powered railway.
Africa's world-class Ethiopian Airlines flying to 97 international passenger and 36 dedicated
cargo destinations; also flies to over 20 domestic passenger destinations.
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam  the largest hydroelectric power dam in Africa  under
construction, expected to generate additional 6,000MW electricity.
Expanding telecommunication services.
Two operational and seven upcoming government industrial parks; four privately developed
industrial parks.
1 00
54 million
Conducive economic factors
* An average of about 11% GDP growth since 2005, one of the fastest growing economies in the
world during the same period (World Bank Global Economic Prospects, CIA World Factbook).
e Stable and conducive macroeconomic environment.
 Implements a structural growth and transformation plan which aims to transform Ethiopia from
an agriculture-led economy to an industrial one.
Favorable market factors
Africas second most populated nation with current size of 100 million.
54 million active labour force, available at competitive wage.
Duty-free, quota-free access to the USA and EU markets through AGOA and EBA.
Duty-free, quota-free access to Japan, Canada, China, Turkey, Australia and New Zealand 
covering substantially all export goods from Ethiopia. Preferential market access to India.
Member of COMESA with preferential market access to a regional market of 400 million people.
Strategic location with proximity to the Middle East, Europe, USA and Asia.
With the vision to make Ethiopia a leading manufacturing hub in Africa by 2025, the government
places high focus on industrial park development and expansion.
Industrial park development
Investment area open for the private sector (domestic and FDI).
State-of-the art industrial parks under construction.
Located along key economic corridors, connected to ports by road and electric-powered railway
lines with close proximity to high labour force pool.
Anchored on the principles of:
- Specialized Parks: enhancing economy of scale and efficiency through the development
of specialized/clustered industrial parks;
- Export Promotion: government provision of industrial park incentives targeted at
increased export performance and competitiveness;
- Sustainability: maintaining high environmental standards through the use of renewable
energy and zero liquid discharge (ZLD) technology;
Vertical Integration: enhancing forward and backward linkages in the economy; and
Skills development and competitiveness: developing workers skills for enterprise
competitiveness.
Ee AyshalP
Kilinto IP
into +g ON
CLs ore oee 0
3 Arerti IP
 on
INDIAN
OCEAN
we
Hawassa Industrial Park-
Eco Industrial Park
Cluster/ Specialization: Textile & apparel
Area: 1.4 million m2 (Pha
Mekelle Industrial Park
Cluster/ Specialization: Textile & apparel,
Footwear & Leather products
Area: 10 million m2
Kombolcha Industrial Park
Dire Dawa Industrial Park
Cluster/ Specialization: Open for multiple
sectors, focused on export as it is the closest
Arerti Industrial Park
Cluster/ Specialization: Building materials
& furniture
Area: Tmillion m2
Bole Lemi Industrial Park
(land I)
Cluster/ Specialization: Textile and apparel,
leather and leather products
Area: 3.5 million m2
Adama Industrial Park
Footwear, Machinery fabrication
Kilinto Industrial Park
Cluster/ Specialization: Pharmaceuticals
Area: 2.8 million m2
Debre Berhan Industrial Park
Cluster/ Specialization: Agro-processing
INDUSTRIAL PARKS IN ETHIOPIA  INCENTIVES PACKAGE
INDUSTRIAL PARKS IN ETHIOPIA  INCENTIVES PACKAGE 5
INDUSTRIAL PARKS INCENTIVES
Investment laws of Ethiopia provide a wide-ranging incentives package for investments in priority
sectors of high export potential, especially targeting industrial parks developers and enterprises.
Income: tax exemption
Customs duty exemption
Ease of access to industrial park space at promotional rate
One-stop shop service
Customs facilitation
Expedited visa procedure
Guarantee against expropriation
The right to own immovable property
Guarantee for remittance of funds
The right to open and operate foreign currency accounts
Industrial park developers and enterprises benefit from a
special tax and other financial incentives package that is
duwith efficiency-enhancing facilitation support and
INCOME TAX EXEMPTION IN INDUSTRIAL PARKS CUSTOMS DUTY AND OTHER TAX EXEMPTION IN INDUSTRIAL PARKS
 Capital goods and accessories: Can be imported duty free by manufacturing
industries.
 Industrial park developer: 10-15 years income tax exemption depending on
location of industrial park (10 years if in Addis Ababa or Special Zones of
Oromia surrounding Addis Ababa, and 15 years in other areas)
 Spare parts: Upto 15% of the total value of the capital goods can be
imported duty free.
Income tax [ie park enterprise: Up to 10 years income tax exemption
exemption
 Machinery spare parts: Enterprises inside industrial parks with 100% export
- Up to 6 years exemption depending on sector of engagement can enjoy importing 100% of machinery spare parts duty free.
- Additional 2-4 years exemption for industrial park enterprises with at least
+ Construction materials: Can be imported duty free based on approved Bill
of Quantity (BoQ).
80% export
Duty
 Motor vehicles: During construction, a maximum of 2 pickup trucks can
be imported duty free. After getting business licence and commencement
of operation or export, a maximum of 3 minibuses, 2 cargo trucks, 2 SUVs,
) 3 hybrid SUVs and buses required to transport permanent employees can
im port be imported duty free. Also, special purpose trucks such as crane trucks,
garbage trucks, ambulances, fire trucks, refrigerated trucks etc can be
imported duty free in line with the specific investment needs and for own
 Expatriate employees of industrial park enterprises: Up to 5 years personal
income tax exemption after issuance of business license by the investment and other
tax free
Investors can carry foward loss for half of the income tax excemption period (maximum of 5 years)
use.
o Partial exporters: Can import duty free a maximum of 2 station wagons
upon reaching paid up capital investment of Ethiopian Birr 200 million or
above, and over 60% export performance for 3 consecutive years.
 Industrial Park developers: Can import duty free a maximum of 2 SUVs and
3 hybrid SUVs after gettting business license and become operational.
 All raw materials needed for the production of export commodities can be
 Personal effects of industrial park residents can be imported duty free.
The government of Ethiopia avails fiscal incentives along
the different stages of investment within industrial parks 
from construction to operation and marketing
Export tax
 For all export products except semi-processed hides and skins
. J
8 INDUSTRIAL PARKS IN ETHIOPIA  INCENTIVES PACKAGE INDUSTRIAL PARKS IN ETHIOPIA  INCENTIVES PACKAGE 9
EASE OF ACCESS TO INDUSTRIAL PARK SPACE
INCENTIVE
For industrial park developers
 60-80 years land sub-lease period depending on the location of the land
GUARANTEE
 Industrial park developers can import construction materials and construction equipment
necessary for their industrial park construction as per special agreement
For industrial park enterprises
e Option to rent or buy factory sheds, or sub-lease developed land at promotional rate to construct
own production facility.
CIs
NON-FISCAL INCENTIVES  Customs Transport of imported raw materials straight from customs post
Investors are provided with various non-fiscal incentives including simplified and streamlined facilitation to factory through bonded warehouse or voucher scheme.
procedures for investment establishment and operation as well as strong property protection and
guarantee. (4) Guarantee against Guarantee against measures of expropriation or
expropriation nationalization.
Payment of compensation corresponding to the prevailing
market value of investment property in case of expropriation or
nationalization for public interest.
The Ethiopian Investment Commission provides the following
One-stop shop services in one-stop shop: The right to Foreign investors have right to own a dwelling house and other
(1) service own immovable immovable property required for the investment.
One-stop shop services provided at head office: issuance of property
investment permits, business licenses, commercial registration
certificates, and work permit; notarizing memorandum and articles
of association, registration of trade or firm name and technology
transfer agreements; as well as issuance of tax identification Subsidized Subsidized utility rates for manufacturing industries:
number (TIN). utility rates e Electricity is sold at estimated rate of 3 US cents/kwh
e Reliable access to electricity within industrial parks 
One-stop shop services provided at industrial parks branch: government avails dedicated power station for parks
renewal of all license issued at head office; visa and work permit
renewal, duty free grant for capital goods, construction materials,
spare parts, accessories and different types of vehicles; customs
clearance; and banking services.
Post-establishment investment facilitation (aftercare) service is
provided by the Ethiopian Investment Commission.
Government avails fully developed infrastructure up to the
perimeter of the park and guarantees access to utilities including a The right  open A foreign investor has the right to open and operate
dedicated power station (5) and operate foreign currency accounts in authorized local banks.
foreign currency
accounts
10 INDUSTRIAL PARKS IN ETHIOPIA  INCENTIVES PACKAGE INDUSTRIAL PARKS IN ETHIOPIA  INCENTIVES PACKAGE 11
Issuance of investment permits
Issuance of business licenses
Commercial registration certificates
Issuance of work permits
Registration of trade or firm name
Technology transfer agreements
Notarizing memorandum and articles of association
Issuance of customs duty exemptions
Issuance of tax identification number (TIN)
Customs clearance in industrial parks
[WE
oO
~
nN
a
)
I
=
wn
Ly
Z
Banking services
Fugly Bue co.
LT PRE OR (SAY L
otk P&C AC
EE ewe em )
TARPRS AYHdderr be2U
Industrial Parks Development Corporation {PDC} P. O. Box 2313  Addis Ababa  Ethiopia Ministry of Industry
Tel: +251 116 616986 / 6674 Tel: +251 11 551 0033 P. O. Box 6945  Addis Ababa  Ethiopia
E-mail: admin. info@ipdc. gov. et Fax: +251 11 551 4396 Tel: +251 11 550 7542
Email: ethioinvest@investethiopia. gov. et Fax: +251 11 575 9871
http: /Avww. moin. gov. et
April 2017
EIC/Ref. no. 02/2017