739 |

ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
Notes on Investment Permit Application Form (Expansion)
A completed application form is one of the documents required for an investment permit.
It is therefore necessary to complete the form as fully and accurately as possible. If the
space provided in the form is not sufficient, use supplementary sheet of paper.
Every investor is required to abide by the laws and regulations of the Country. An
investor who submits an application for investment permit will, therefore, be automatically
taken for unconditional commitment to all laws, regulations, directives and specifically
those related to the specific investment area.
The investment permit should be used only for the purpose of implementing the approved
investment project.
The application form should be submitted together with other required documents.
The application form is FREE COPY. Receipt is provided for any payment effected for the
service rendered.
Please attach relevant documents that inform about your previous business background.
Do not detach this cover page from this application form.
For further information, kindly contact the Agency.
Contact Address
Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC), P. O. Box 2313, Tel. 251-011-551 00
33, Fax 251-011-551 43 96, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia;
Web site: http: //www. investethiopia. gov. et
Provision of efficient and fair services at the best satisfaction of Our Customers is our Core value.
APPLCATION FORM FOR EXPANSION
Upgrading investment project
1. PARTICULAS OF THE APPLICANT
1.1 Name and Address
 Name of Investor COMPANY... ... .. .. ote ee ese eee
 Location of the previous project
 REGION suerereeererrirersrcsisenens Telephone... ... .... cool.
City. ooo Project site ... ... o. oo
ZONE... .. oii se Cell phone... ... ..................
Wereda... ... ... ... ccc... Fax. ooo
Kebele ............ o. oo. E-mail on
P. OBOX... oct
If the expansion location is different from the previous
Region City/Zone... ....... coos ee
Wereda Kebele... ............ coco
2. Profile of Proposed Investment for the expansion/upgrading
2.1 Project title /Investment activity/
22 Brief description of the project objective and major activities: -
3. Proposed capital and source of capital for the expansion/upgrading
 Proposed Fxpansion Capital
 Source of Finance
Equity
Loan
Others please list all source of capital for the project.
 Estimated investment cost
o Land... o. oo
o Building. ...... .. o. oo... ..
eo Working Capital... ... .. .. ............
eo Machinery... ..........
o  Material/Equipment... ... ... .. ... .....
o Other COSIS... ... coo icv eis een
o Total... ........ o. oo...
3. Expected employment opportunity
3.1 Expected
Permanent
Temporary
3.2 Previously created opportunity
No Permanent Temporary
) Male Female | Male | Female
/
Total
4. Project site/utility required for expansion
4.1 Size of land required (Sq. M or Ha)
4.2 Electrical Power Kw
4.3 Water wm
4.4 Telecom services needed
4.5 Others (if any)
5. Main Products/ Services
Show the Average production capacity (in percentage %) of each products/services and market
destination in the past 2 year and anticipated amount with increased percentage in volume and
new products as a result of expansion.
5.1 The past 2 years production services and sale program (average)
Type of Products
Capacity Market share
Unit
Quantity
Domestic Export
5.2 Anticipates (future) annual prod/service and Percentage increase and market share.
Type of Capacity Percentage increased Expected market share
product | Unit Quantity Capacity Domestic | Export
Unit Quantity
Raw material requirements (applicable to manufacturing and agricultural projects only)
No.
Type of Raw Material
Source of supply (to be
marked as v')
Local Foreign
6. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
Please provide as reasonable and appropriate schedule
6.1 Starting and ending date of the project
Starting Date
Ending Date
6.2 Detail Activities and implementation time
NO Activities Implementation date
D/M/Y
1 Project development and feasibility study
2 Land acquisition
3 Building/Civil work
 Including foe construction material Parching order and
purchase.
4 Public utility acquisition
o Electricity
eo Water
e Telecom
e Ifother.........
5 Machinery procurement purchase
6 Reaching of machinery at project site
7 Work permit for technician
8 Machinery erection installation
Preparation of raw material (order, Purchase, import)
10 | Co missing machines and make ready for operator
11 | Any other
12 | Common cement of product service
* Please try to provide accelerate information for further support of EIA on the expansion process
7. Document to be attached
The following documents should be attached with the application letter.
_
Copy of business license
2. Summary of financial statement of the recent two years
3. Feasibility study of the project
4. List of capital goods and basic raw materials
4.1 machinery
4.2 workshop tools and
4.3 laboratory equipment
4.4 construction materials (if imported)
4.5 raw materials and inputs (if imported)
5. land lice agreement (if the expansion or upgrading is planned to be held on existing site)
8 Please provide as information on the following
1. Main factors influencing project implementation Plan and product marketing of the
existing project ( Facility land , sales performance, variation in gross margin, over heads,
finance cost, raw material cost variation, tax system... ..... )
2. What do you intended to do in order to avoid previous problems for the fast. And
accurate implementation of the expansion project.
3. What are the Basic support that has to be provided by EIC
4. Please specify If you have other comments
Declaration and Signature of Applicant
1, hereby, declare that all the information provided are complete and correct.
Name of Applicant coccinea
Responsibility .......... coiiiiiiii
Signature ree eens
Date ee re errr reas
FOR OFFICE USE ONLY
Permitted Rejected
If rejected, reasons: ................... ili ee
Reviewed/ Approved by:
Name:
SEGUATUFE. ooo eet ete teats oes et ne ete eee
Date: