The Ethiopian Investment Board delivered a decision relating to
improving the logistics industry in Ethiopia

Ethiopian Investment Commission
Improving Ethiopias logistics sector performance has been one of the key areas identified
under the Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP Il). The Logistics sector matters
in several critical ways: as a supporting industry to the manufacturing sector, to improve
investment attraction/retention and for increasing the countrys international trade
performance by enhancing export competitiveness. However, to date, no significant
improvement in cost or speed to market has been achieved. The countrys low
performance against its peers under international benchmarks is a key testament in this
regard.
Today Ethiopia is at the cusp of manufacturing transformation. At this pivotal moment a
deliberate, proactive, and progressive growth strategy for the logistics sector is needed.
In doing so, a National Logistics Strategy has been approved last week by the Council of
Ministers. In addition, the Ethiopian Investment Commission, in cooperation with the
relevant government agencies and through the support of the World Bank Group has
spearheaded several studies and consultations with industry stakeholders with the aim to
identify the key binding constraints facing the sector and provide policy
recommendations. These initiatives have recognized that in addition to its role as a
supporting industry to other sectors of the economy, the logistics sector can be
developed as a thriving and productive cluster that serves as another pillar of
industrialization and driver of growth.
One of the key shortcomings of the sector relate to policy and regulatory barriers that
precluded participation of international logistics service providers. Among others this has
imposed serious strains on the export manufacturing sector as it limited the availability of
capital and technology intensive end-to-end logistics solutions. Globally competing
manufacturing firms have time and again stressed that such limitations have deprived
them of logistics options that are available to their competitors in the international
market.
The move to a modern logistics sector that serves the needs of cargo owners and at the
same time delivers as another source of productive and sustained growth requires
addressing constraints arising from current regulatory framework that prevents the
participation of international logistics service providers. Meanwhile, it is also imperative
to ensure that such reform objectives do not impose undue burden on the growth of the
domestic logistics industry. In doing so one key consideration has been the promotion of
joint venture investments between international players and their Ethiopian
counterparts, the former holding minority stake participation. This will not only promote
the transfer of technology and know-how to Ethiopia but also ensure that domestic
players will retain key decision-making powers.
Accordingly, in accordance with the mandate given to it under the Investment
Proclamation (as amended), the Ethiopian Investment Board has decided to lift the
restrictions imposed under Article 3.1(b) of the Investment Regulation No. 270/2012,
including the provision of bonded warehouse, consolidation and deconsolidation services
and allow joint venture participation of international logistics service providers holding up
to 49% or less stakes.
The decision is significant as it will improve the provision of high-end logistics services
while local firms acquire world class knowledge, expertise, management, and systems by
working jointly with globally reputed logistics service providers.
Ethiopian Investment Board
September 2018