LVhoy klar VULY S53EVS
N OISSIAWOD INIWISIANI NVIdOIH13

J1dv
ARIANA
~~
Message from the Management and Staff of
the Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC)
We extend our congratulations to H. E. Dr. Abiy Ahmed Ali, Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia on being awarded the 2019 Nobel Peace Prize.
It is a much-deserved recognition of his hard work, dedication and commitment to peace in our
region. His admirable efforts have laid the foundation for peace, co-existence and prosperity for all.
We salute your success and we continue to be inspired by you to build a better future for Ethiopia
and Africa as a whole.
Acronyms
ADLI - Agriculture-Development Led Industrialization
ARRA - Administration for Refugees and Returnees Affairs
CADF - China-Africa Development Fund
CAETE - China Africa Economic Cooperation Exposition
CCER - China Centre for Economic Research
CCPIT - China Council for the Promotion of International Trade
CEO - Chief Executive officer
CFO - Chief Finance Officer
CIFIT ~~ - China International Fair for Investment & Trade
CILE - China International Import Exposition
COO - Chief Operations Officer
DB - Doing Business
DFID - Department for International Development
EIB - Ethiopian Investment Board
EIC - Ethiopian Investment Commission
EP - Enterprise Partners
EPSA - Ethiopia Pharmaceuticals Supply Agency
EU - European Union
FDI - Foreign Direct Investment
GVC - Global Value Chains
IFC - International Financial Corporation
IPDC - Industrial Parks Development Corporation
IPR - Intellectual Property Rights
ITC - International Trade Centre
JCP - Jobs Compact Programme
\% - Joint Venture
MA - Manufacturing Africa
MDG - Millennium Development Goals
MFI - Micro-Finance Institutions
MICE - Meetings Incentives Conferences and Exhibitions
MoLSA - Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
MoU - Memorandum of Understanding
OSS - One Stop Shop Service
PIGA - Partnership for Investment and Growth in Africa
PPP - Public Private Partnership
SOE - State-owned enterprises
TBI - Tony Blair Institute
UNCTAD-United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNHCR - United Nations High Commission for Refugees
WB - World Bank
WTO - World Trade Organization
YPDP -Young Professionals Development Programme
Contents
Message from the management and staff of the Ethiopian Investment Commission
Message from the Commissioner
Ethiopia at a Glance
Ethiopian Investment Commission Management Team
1. Trends in FDI inflows to Ethiopia
2. National economic reforms and implications for investment
A. The Homegrown Economic Reform agenda and policy framework
B. Ease of doing business
3. Investment reforms
A. Reform in Ethiopias investment legislation
B. Key takeaways under the new investment legislation
4. Ethiopian Investment Commission: Key undertakings
A. Online registration and licensing: Keeping up with the time
B. The PIGA programme: Partnership-driven investment promotion
C. Building the next generation of Ethiopian technocrats: EICs Young Professional
Development Programme
D. The objectives of Jobs Compact programme
5. Tourism: Time to reveal the hidden potential
6. A brief summary of a sectoral study conducted by the EIC
A. The pharmaceutical sector
B. The agro-processing sector
Book review
The Oxford Handbook on Industrial Hubs and Economic Development
>
Abebe Abebayehu
The sweeping reforms that H. E Dr Abiy Ahmed, the
Prime Minister of Ethiopia, started in 2018 have gained
momentum during 2019 giving hope and inspiration
to many within and outside Ethiopia. 2019 will be
remembered as a year in which peace and prosperity
were framed as the two central pillars of Ethiopia's
development vision and the government's aspiration to
achieve inclusive, fair and sustainable development.
While achieving double-digit growth is important
and necessary for generating wealth and propelling
the process of capital accumulation, it is insufficient
if it does not create productive jobs, reduce poverty,
improve living standards and result in widely shared
prosperity. Only through shared prosperity will we be
able to tackle the adverse consequences of inequality,
youth unemployment, social injustice, deprivation
and achieve a lasting peace. Prosperity, like peace,
is indivisible; and achieving one is necessary for
achieving the other.
These are the principles that guide our work at the Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC), Ethiopia's leading
investment promotion agency. Investment (both local and foreign)  made in response to demand or emerging
opportunities  creates new jobs, which enables workers to earn an income, which leads to consumption
and greater demand for goods and services, which in turn leads to more investment and continues the cycle
of growth. It was largely due to this central role of investment as an engine of growth and prosperity that
major efforts were made during 2019 to reform Ethiopias investment laws and regulations. This annual report
discusses the rationale behind the investment law reforms, the scope and depth of the reforms undertaken and
the implications for investment promotion.
Thus, at this point, suffice it to say that the reform process has been completed successfully and as of January
2020, Ethiopia has new investment laws endorsed and approved by Parliament. I am deeply grateful to the team
that spearheaded the drafting process under the leadership and guidance of the EIC. The consultative approach
adopted was comprehensive and exemplary. It involved all relevant stakeholders, particularly private enterprises
 both local and foreign  who are most affected by the laws and regulations that govern the countrys investment
regime.
The modernization of investment laws is essential for attracting increased investment. But, by itself, it is
insufficient unless supported by an administrative and regulatory environment conducive to doing business.
Ethiopias current ranking in the World Banks ease of doing business Index is unacceptable for a country that
has achieved growth rates above most countries in the world and that has emerged as one of the top five biggest
FDI recipient countries in Africa. In this connection, the reforms in ease of doing business initiated by His
Excellency, the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Dr Abiy Ahmed, has been a timely and a welcome undertaking. As
explained in this annual report, his direct leadership and guidance has enabled us to make steady progress in
removing some of the regulatory hurdles and unwieldy administrative procedures that investors encounter when
starting a business in Ethiopia. | have no doubt that within the coming two years, Ethiopia will be among the top
100 ranking countries in ease of doing business.
A key challenge in Ethiopias current development trajectory is the slow progress in export growth, particularly
merchandize exports. Increasing export capacity is a sine-qua-non for generating the foreign currency that
the country needs to import essential goods and services and creating job opportunities for the millions of
young people who join the labour market every year. The role of FDI is critical in creating the production and
supply capacity that the country needs to boost export growth. The EIC devotes most of its activities attracting
and facilitating foreign investors who can contribute to export growth. As discussed in this report, the policy
ya
decision to establish industrial parks has been decisive in transforming Ethiopia into an attractive destination
for efficiency-seeking FDI searching for countries with the right policy environment and competitive production
cost structure. The industrial parks  both private and public  have enabled Ethiopia to attract increased FDI,
growing on average by 50% a year since 2011/12 and reaching a peak of US4.1 billion (5.1% of GDP) in 2017.
What is worth noting is the increasing concentration of FDI in manufacturing activities, which demonstrates that
Ethiopia's export-led industrialization strategy, anchored in the manufacturing sector, is working and will lift the
country up in the development ladder and catch-up with middle-income economies.
In the current global economic environment, it is difficult to predict how the global FDI flows and trends will
unfold in the coming years. According to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD),
global FDI flows have been on a downward slide since 2017, which partly explains the slight decline in FDI
flows to some African countries, including Ethiopia in 2018. It seems that this sliding trend, along with the
impact of the coronavirus on investment flows and the smooth operation of the global supply chains, may
continue to dampen foreign investors plans to initiate new investments. However, at EIC, we are confident that
Ethiopia will attract increased FDI in the course of 2020 and the amount will exceed the peak reached in 2017.
Our confidence and conviction is based on the following reality: the initiation of a home-grown economic
reform programme which has already begun to stabilize the macroeconomic policy environment; the launch
of the Ten-year Perspective Plan, mapping the policy direction and the priority sectoral pillars for the rest of this
decade; the opening of sectors that were previously closed to foreign investors and Ethiopian Diasporas; the
government's decision to privatize major State-owned enterprises; the completion within the next two years
of industrial parks that are currently under construction; the dividend and goodwill generated from the peace
process that our Prime Minister has initiated; and the dynamism of a new leadership in Ethiopia with a vision
to take the country into a higher stage of development. These are some of the building blocks that will help us
position our country as an attractive location for quality investment.
Aware of this potential, we, at EIC, have begun to introduce the tools and capacities that we need to create
an investment promotion agency fit-for-purpose and capable of contributing to the countrys development
vision. During 2020, we will conduct a series of capacity building measures aimed at improving our statistical
management capability, investment promotion skills and our ability to reach out to potential investors targeting
those we wish to attract. We are currently developing a new investment promotion strategy that will reflect the
new investment laws and regulations. We have introduced an online licensing system to ease the process for
new investors and will continue to use digital technology as an effective tool for investment promotion and
facilitation.
Strengthening our working relationship with regional investment offices/commissions will be given top priority,
including through the application of digital technology to consolidate information on investors gathered by
different regions. We are currently developing an aftercare services strategy based on best practice experiences
to help us upgrade our work on investment facilitation, monitoring the contributions of FDI to job creation, export
growth and capability building through linkages and provide the necessary support as the need arises. This will
include supporting foreign investors in industrial parks working closely with the Industrial Parks Development
Corporation (IPDC). We will also strengthen our analytical capability to ensure that the actions we take are
based on informed evidence and reflective of the reality on the ground.
I wish to take this opportunity to thank other institutions  public and private  and development partners who
collaborated with us and made our efforts to attract and retain investment possible. Above all, 1 wish to thank
the staff at EIC for their dedication and commitment in translating our mission, hope and vision into a reality.
Commissioner
MEIC
ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
PATERE ATAANTOTE hOLU 7
Abebe Abebayehu y
Commissioner aA
+251-115539474 A
abebe. abebayehu@ethio-invest. com y I MH
A
NY A
AN NJ A
Official Name: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Capital City: Addis Ababa
Area: 1.13 Million square kilometers
Time Zone: GMT +3
Population size: ~110 Million
. A
Hanna Arayaselassie A y 3 rN
Deputy Commissioner / A /
Industrial Park Division A
+251-115510033 y A a y
hanna. arayaselassie@ethio-invest. com
7a NA y
177 y y I \
x A A A A |
\ y A A ND A
AAAA AN
negro
Policy Research & Promotion Division A A A FN yu
temesgen. tilahun@ethio-invest. com
mA NNN SA
9 ANN NM A
WW.
ANNAN IN
Anteneh Alemu
reese opens risen |
ia a com VN V5 A y 5 AN
ANNAN INNMD
CAN AN AN A A MN
Currency: Ethiopian Birr (ETB)
GDP per capita (2017): 767.56
GDP (2019): 91 Billion USD
GDP growth rate (10-year average): 10%
One of the top 5 FDI destinations in Africa
Regional platform:
e Current African country hosing the AU and ECA
e Ratified of the African Continental Free Trade Agreement
e [Ethiopia has had strong ties within the Horn of Africa (incl. Eritrea)
=) J * Head of State: H. E. Sahle-Work Zewde
* Head of Government: H. E. Abiy Ahmed
e H. E. Prime Minister Dr. Abiy Ahmed was awarded the 2019 Nobel Peace Prize
* Ethiopias cabinet is now a record 50 percent female
e Ethiopia has developed and is implementing a new Home Grown Economic Reform Agenda
aimed at at sustaining the countrys rapid economic growth.
e Ethiopia has implemented a series of reforms towards improving its investment and doing
business environment.
 Ethiopia has overhauled its investment law; a new Investment Proclamation has been issued
e Ethiopia is finalizing the revision of its Commercial Code and Export Incentives Proclamation
to promote greater investment within the country.
(
FEA 
| EF EEE
| EEE EE
Ul
{
2)
Trends in FDI flows to Ethiopia
African economies can draw on a range of external
sources of finance, including Overseas Development
Assistance (ODA), loans (private and public),
remittances, portfolio equity investment and Foreign
Direct investment (FDI). For many, FDI has been the
most reliable and largest source of external finance.
It has also been an important source of technology
transfer, access to management skills, marketing
network and a major driver of export trade. FDI inflow
into African countries has risen sharply in the last
two decades, in line with improvements in economic
performance and a growing global demand for African
products.
Ethiopia has been one of the countries that has
attracted substantial amount of FDI. However, despite
high-level economic growth since early 2000, it was
only after 2012 that Ethiopia began to attract FDI in
quantities commensurate with the countrys economic
size and growth performance. Between 2003 and
2011, for example, Ethiopia's GDP growth rate was an
unprecedented 10.3 per cent on average - up from less
than 3 per cent annual growth during the previous ten
years and much faster than the average annual growth
in Africa as a whole (nearly 6 per cent). Ethiopia was
one of the fastest growing economies in the word
and even the global financial crisis of 2008/9 and the
subsequent collapse in global commodity prices did
not hinder Ethiopia's growth drive.
MNA2
The impressive growth performance had a positive
impact on the countrys economy. Ethiopia's per capita
income increased over two-fold during the same period,
albeit from a very low base. The countrys headcount
poverty ratio (the percentage of its population living
on an income of under $1.25 per day in PPP terms)
fell by more than half, meeting the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) target well before 2015.
These improvements were underpinned by a steady
increase in public investment in agriculture, education,
health and road development and a shift in industrial
strategy towards export-led industrialization, anchored
in the manufacturing sector and based on inputs from
agriculture.
Transition from the least to the most
favoured FDI destination in East
Africa...
Yet, FDI inflow during the initial period of growth was
consistently below the level expected for a country
that was growing above the global average. As shown
in Figure 1, between 2000 and 2011, Ethiopia was
the least favourite FDI destination country in East
Africa, attracting - in most years - below US$500
million, despite the countrys outstanding economic
performance and a growth rate far above any country
in the African region and the developing world as a
whole.
FDI inflow in East Africa
Millions of dollars at current prices
0 =
2000 2001 2
== Ethiopia === Kenya sg
Rwanda e=@e
Uganda e=@= United Republic of Tanzania
Figure 1. FDI Inflow in East Africa | Source: UNCTAD Database
However, Ethiopia's fortune as an FDI destination
began to change around 2012. Since then FDI inflows
to Ethiopia have been growing by 50 per cent per
year on average, reaching the peak of $4.1 billion in
2017. While FDI inflow to Ethiopia declined slightly
in 2018 - in line with the global downward trends and
the slowdown in global economic growth - Ethiopia
was still the largest recipient of FDI in the East African
region and the fifth largest recipient of FDI in Africa
after Egypt, South Africa, Congo and Morocco (Figure
2 next page).
13 /\
Developing economies in Africa
FDI flows, Top 5 host Economies
Flows, by range
B Above $3.0bn
B 5201082960
 $1010 51.960 
1 $05t0809ba
 Below $05bn
Top 5 host economies
Economy
 Value of inflows
2018 % change
Figure 2. FDI Inflow, Top 5 Host Economies | Source: UNCTAD, WIR 2019
In fact, in 2018, Ethiopia absorbed about half of the FDI inflows to East Africa: the total quantity received that
year was 3 times larger than the second-ranked country in the group (the Republic of Tanzania). Moreover, in
2018, Ethiopia's stock of FDI was larger than any other country in the region after remaining well below other
countries during the first decade of 2000. Once again, the cut-off period for the sudden increase in the stock of
FDI in Ethiopia was 2010/11.
FDI stock in East Africa
What are the explanations for the post-2011/2 surge
in FDI flows to Ethiopia? What has been the impact
on sectoral distribution of FDI and its contributions to
domestic productive capacity building?
Domestic investment-driven
growth...
From Figure 1, it is evident that Ethiopias rapid growth
inthe pre-2012 period was not driven by FDI but largely
by domestic investment, particularly public investment
in key sectors such as agriculture, infrastructure,
construction and the services sector. During this
period, public investment in infrastructure alone
reached around 20 per cent of GDP (US$6 billion),
which was large relative to the size of the economy
and compared to FDI flows to Ethiopia. The massive
public investment helped to fuel domestic demand
and enhance the economys productive potential.
At that time, the most important source of external
finance was not FDI but ODA and remittances, which
helped to complement public investment particularly
in social sectors. Rising international commodity
prices also helped to increase merchandize exports
at an average annual rate of 10.5 per cent between
2004 and 2009. Obviously, these favourable external
environments helped to sustain the growth momentum.
In contrast, however, the role of FDI in Ethiopia's
growth process during the first decade of this century
was minimal.
Industrial
Parks in
Ethiopia
Bahir-Dar IP
The turning point in FDI
inflows...
The turning point for FDI inflow came when the
country was preparing to implement its first Growth
and Transformation Plan (GTP |  2010-2015), which
coincided withanincreased inflow of foreign investment
from non-traditional investors in the South, particularly
Turkey, China and India, and the establishment and
inauguration of the first industrial park in Ethiopia  the
Eastern Industrial Zone (E1Z)  built by a Chinese private
company, the Yonggang group. With hindsight, the
construction and operation of the EIZ was instrumental
in influencing the government's decision to build
publicly owned industrial parks as policy instruments
to attract export oriented (or efficiency-seeking) FDI
and promote exports of value-added goods. In this
respect, the decision to construct industrial parks was
a step change in the evolution of Ethiopia's industrial
policy and export-led industrialization strategy.
Industrial parks are specially designated economic
sites containing all the necessary support systems and
the basic infrastructure and services  such as, energy,
water, transport connection, logistics, production
sheds, etc. ,  that enterprises need to manufacture
goods for export. The readily availability of these
essential provisions and administrative services within
a confined area makes industrial parks the most
preferred investment sites for FDI. They minimize
the hassle-factor and the cumbersome process of
Mekelle IP
Kombolcha IP
Debre-Berhan IP
00 22.25 Bole Lemi 1 Ayisha IP!
Bole Lemi 2 e Dire-Dawa IP
20.00 re
Kilinto IP .
Arerti IP
 Huajian IP Adama IP
= 15.00 Adama Hunan
2 Jimma IP
5 10.00
m
5.00
Oo
2000 2010 2018 Hawassa IP- Phase |
Eastern Industry Zone
Hawassa IP- Phase II
o- Ethiopia #Kenya #Uganda @ United Republic of Tanzania @Rwanda
Figure 3 FDI Stock in East Africa | Source: UNCTAD database
15
initiating investment, especially in countries where the
administrative system is still underdeveloped and basic
infrastructures are not widely available or accessible
throughout the country.
It was not surprising, therefore, that the first Growth
and Transformation Plan (GTP 1-2010-2015) identified
industrial parks as one of the main policy instruments
for driving the export-led industrialization agenda.
Since 2011, the government has constructed twelve
industrial parks and the total number  including private
industrial parks  has reached nineteen. The plan is
to construct a total of 30 industrial parks by the end
of 2025. The parks are expected to attract investment
into selected and largely export-oriented activities.
The priority sectors include textile and apparel, leather
products, agro-processing, pharmaceutical products
and information and communications technologies
(ICTs).
The first three sectors were selected to maximize
Ethiopia's comparative advantages. The selection of
the pharmaceutical sector and the construction of the
Kilinto Pharmaceutical Industrial Park was based on a
dual objective of creating import-substitution capacity
and attracting export-oriented investment. The
rationale for establishing the ICT Park in Addis Ababa
in 2011 was to serve as the major driver of Ethiopias
Digital transformation agenda and attract investment
in export-oriented IT products and IT-enabled services.
N16
The sudden surge in FDI flows to Ethiopia since
2012 is undoubtedly related to the shift in industrial
policy, particularly the decision to establish state-of-
art industrial parks containing all the services and
infrastructure necessary for investment. The parks have
so far served as magnets pulling FDI into the country at
a rate unprecedent in the countrys recent history. More
importantly, however, they have been instrumental in
triggering new trends in the role of FDI in the country.
Three of these trends are worth highlighting.
Manufacturing as a source of FDI
attraction...
First, increasingly FDI in Ethiopia is concentrating in
the manufacturing sector, which is exceptional for a
low-income and agrarian-based African economy. In
most developing countries, FDI is dominant in the
extractive, agricultural and service sectors. Currently,
on average about 60 per cent of FDI flows to Ethiopia
goes to the manufacturing sector. This makes Ethiopia
one of a handful African countries where the bulk
of FDI stock is invested in the manufacturing sector,
largely due to investment attracted into the industrial
parks. This is good news for Ethiopia. It illustrates that
the Government's ultimate objective of growth with
structural transformation and sustainable development
by encouraging investment flows into productive
sectors is working.
Trends in FDI flows in the
manufacturing sector
(in Billion USD)
2014
2015 2016 2017
did FDI flow to the manufacturing sector
AA FDI flow to the other sectors
Figure 4 FDI in Ethiopia in Billion USD | Source: EIC
2018
The surge in
sreenfield investment...
The contribution of FDI to domestic
capital formation.....
Second, increased FDI flows to manufacturing sector
represent a surge in what is often referred to as
greenfield investment, which is investment in new
and productive investment projects. These are the
types of FDI that countries prefer to attract because of
their positive impact on job creation, introduction of
new technology and sometimes new products.
Announced greenfield
investments in textile and
leather sectors
Country Amount
Kazakhstan 2656
Vietnam 869
China 466
Ethiopia 306
Indonesia 193
India 157
Russian Federation 150
Cambodia 149
Mexico 140
Serbia 129
France 92
Myanmar Fit
United Kingdom 65
Egypt 50
Bosnia and Herzegovina 47
Finland 46
Belarus 39
Dominican Republic 30
Table 1. Announced Greenfield Projects Millions USD
Source: UNCTAD database
Globally announced greenfield investment has been
on a long-term downward slide for the last decade.
In Africa, Ethiopia is one of a few countries where
announced greenfield investment has been rising
in recent years linked to increased investment in
industrial parks. According to UNCTAD, for example,
in 2018, Ethiopia was among the top five countries
in the world that have attracted a significant amount
of greenfield investment into the textile, clothing and
leather sectors. (Table, 1).
M18
Third, the upsurge in greenfield investment flows to
Ethiopia has implications for productive capacity
building through its impact on Gross Fixed Capital
Formation (GFCF). GFCF measures the net investment
in fixed capital, which is indicative of how much a
firm or a country is developing its productive capacity.
Ultimately, economic development is not about
achieving high level growth only, as is often assumed,
but also about building the productive capacity that a
country needs to produce a wide range of high-quality
products and services for domestic consumption
and/or to export competitively. While it is possible
to achieve high-level growth without necessarily
making significant progress in productive capacity
building, in the long-term, the growth achieved will be
unsustainable without productive capacity building.
The latter requires a process of capital accumulation
and investment in fixed capital. GFCF measures the
net increase in fixed domestic capital.
Generally, countries with rapid rates of economic
growth tend to devote a higher percentage of GDP to
investment, most of it invested in fixed assets, including
technology, to enable them to improve productivity
and achieve economic growth. The more countries
increase net investment in fixed capital and replace
old technologies by new and emerging technologies,
the more likely that these countries accumulate
productive capability and achieve sustained growth.
FDI inflows as a percentage of
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
(GFCF)
10.1
1.8
2010 2011 2012
Formation (GFCF)
Figure 5 presents the share of FDI in GFCF in Ethiopia.
It is evident that the proportion of FDI flows as a
percentage of domestic capital formation in the early
growth years was insignificant. However, as FDI inflows
increased, the share of FDI in total GFCF rose rapidly
and significantly from less than 2 per cent in 2012 to
15 per cent in 2016, suggesting that FDI has become
a major contributor to domestic capital formation and
productive capacity building. As FDI inflow declined
slightly in the last two years, there has been a downward
slide in the share of FDI to GFCF. However, it remains
higher than the average for African countries.
The way forward...
The world is on a slow and uneven growth trajectory
with uncertainties on the future of the multilateral
trading system and the impact of the coronavirus on
investment flows and the smooth operation of the
Global Value Chains (GVCs). It is difficult to predict
the trend in global FDI flows in such uncertain times.
However, given the intensity and scope of the economic
reforms that are currently underway in Ethiopia, which
includes a major overhaul of investment laws and the
privatization of major State-owned enterprises, and
the completion of a number of industrial parks that are
currently under construction, it is expected that in the
course of 2020, Ethiopia will attract greater amounts of
FDI exceeding the peak reached in 2017.
12.1
9.7
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Be Africa === Ethiopia
Figure 5 FDI Inflows as a Percentage of Gross Fixed Capital
ANNAN
i) itd vi i
5 ry
TELE EEE
E
mpli
for i
reforms and
cat
conomic
10NS
nvestment
 i | | Hu  =
ee ] 11 TIA
m5IsE (If TH
| { Nf be } E 2
mt 0 { fy bed 8 1
=m | | wm im
~~] y i
: 11
_ a 4 i :
: =| [= 114
=f ES  | i
rip] | | >
 I
Cm]  1 Life 3 7 3 - i al
Ei = :  | 3 i
- = ~Z 25 Yi [ k
IT. = d u a
Wis; RR ee i r ] :
: IR 2 2 2. ;
i =
: INI | i ; :
i  ! (] I 0 -
Zev 1 i i
= Ll a)
tr [= =: ; 1 i] Sl a
fi | 'f 4
LHe  1 LE
[1 = 2 -
Tole
;
i 0
; 1
6 
/ j
/ |
| I
0 1
{ ; fet |
0 0 i |
p(s] |
| { CHU )
ANC ' ALC [ c : : : :
= J!
a a re 5 = x
5
5 *8
Over the past 15 years, the Ethiopian economy Macroeconomic reforms to correct gr
registered a double-digit growth rate and over a three- foreign exchange imbalances, ;
fold increase in per capita income. Growth was pro- control inflation, safeguard
poor as reflected in a significant poverty reduction financial stability while promoting
and improvements in access to education, health and intermediation, and ensuring debt
infrastructure. This remarkable progress was made sustainability;
possible through a public investment agenda aimed at A
building critically needed human and physical capital. Structural reforms to ease " ms | r J
institutional and structural APTN aa (Ensure debt suitability J
Sustaining this significant progress requires correcting bottlenecks to productivity and
macroeconomic imbalances, easing structural and job growth; and | reductic
institutional bottlenecks to doing business, and  A A ( A
creating new sources of jobs and productivity growth. Sectoral reforms to address Refine TY, > | O : i
To assist with these adjustments, the Government of institutional and market failures EEENREYX. o. _ ) Ah SAKA AN
Ethiopia has launched a comprehensive and well- inhibiting productivity growth in EE 
coordinated homegrown economic reform agenda key strategic sectors.
aimed at stabilizing the countrys economy within the (
next three years. The home-gown reform agenda has Key priority sectors where reforms are particularly [
three pillars: targeted include agriculture, manufacturing, tourism, (Challenges J
N22
mining, and ICT.
Figure 5. Homegrown Reform Agenda Pillars and Framework
23 A
>>
Doing
SIEGES
B.
Ease of Doing Business
The Context to the Ease of Doing
Business in Ethiopia
Despite its impressive growth rate, relatively stable
macro-economic environment and attractiveness
to FDI, Ethiopia ranks much lower than many Sub-
Saharan African Countries on the World Bank's
Ease of Doing Business Index. In 2019, Ethiopia
ranked 159 among 190 countries, unchanged
from its ranking in 2018. This outcome suggests
that the numerous policy adjustments, investment
policy reforms and business-friendly industrial
policy measures  for example, the establishment
of industrial parks - that the government introduced
over the last decade had minimum impact on
improvements in the administrative and regulatory
environment for starting a business in Ethiopia. The
World Bank's ease of doing business is a widely
accepted indicator for measuring the domestic
policy environment and administrative procedures
for starting business in a country.
The government of Ethiopia is concerned that the
countrys poor performance in doing business
(DB) will discourage the flow of investment into
the country and slow down growth. And most
importantly, a poor doing business environment
can impede the growth of small and medium
enterprises. At present, Ethiopia ranks much lower
than other competitor countries in the African
region such as Mauritius (20), Rwanda (29), Kenya
(61), Zambia (87), Djibouti (99), Tanzania (144) and
Uganda (127). To improve Ethiopia's investment and
doing business environment, the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia, H. E. Abiy Ahmed established a special
Steering Committee to spearhead the reforms in all
the ten indicators that are used to measure the ease
of doing business. The Committee started its work
in December 2018 and has been meeting regularly
 once a month and under the chairmanship of the
Prime Minister - to monitor progress in the reform
process and identify appropriate measures to make
the business environment friendly and attractive.
DB Improvements since 2010
Ethiopia is currently ranked 159th with a total score
of 48.0 according to the Doing Business 2020 report.
Topic rankings and topic scores can be summarized
as per below.
Rankings on doing business topics
 TN
| 137 |
/
7d TMN
 [ 142 |)
= | 1]
1 (3
Starting Dealing Getting
a with Electricity
Business Construction
Permits
Topic Scores
>, ,
~TM \ \
BRA | 597 | 60.1 |
\ a a
Starting a Business (rank)
Score of starting a business (0-100)
Procedures (number)
Time (days)
Cost (number)
Paid-in min. capital (% of income per capita)
Dealing with Construction Permits (rank)
Score of dealing with construction permits (0-100)
Cost (% of warehouse value)
Building quality control index (0-15)
Getting Electricity (rank)
Score of getting electricity (0-100)
Cost (% of income per capita)
Reliability of supply and transparency of tariff index (0-8)
Registering Property (rank)
Score of registering property (0-100)
Cost (% of property value)
Quality of the land administration index (0-30)
Registering
Property
15.0 10.0
Getting Credit (rank)
Score of getting credit (0-100)
Strength of legal rights index (0-12)
Depth of credit information index (0-8)
Credit registry coverage (% of adults)
Credit bureau coverage (% of adults)
Protecting Minority Investors (rank)
Score of protecting minority investors (0-100)
Extent of disclosure index (0-10)
Extent of director liability index (0-10)
Ease of shareholder suits index (0-10)
Extent of shareholder rights index (0-6)
Extent of ownership and control index (0-7)
Extent of corporate transparency index (0-7)
Paying Taxes (rank)
Score of paying taxes (0-100)
Payments (number per year)
Time (hours per year)
Total tax and contribution rate (% of profit)
Postfiling index (0-100)
Summary of DB reform agenda and
structure
Launched as a national flagship reform initiative in
December 2018 by the Prime Minister, Dr. Abiy Ahmed.
Framed as part of broader economic competitiveness
and job creation agenda.
e Target: Implement bold and deep reforms, be
among the top 100 ranking countries in 3 years.
* Methodology: Specific, measurable and time-
bound reform action plan was developed (with
short, medium and long-term reform measures)
63.3
37.7
51.6
X [ 140
@
Enforcing Resolving
Contracts Insolvency
, TM,
56.0 62.8 |) 303 J)
a
Trading across Borders (rank) 156
Score of trading across borders (0-100) 56.0
Time to export
Documentary compliance (hours) 76
Border compliance (hours) 51
Cost to export
Documentary compliance (USD) 175
Border compliance (USD) 172
Documentary compliance (hours) 194
Border compliance (hours) 72
Documentary compliance (USD) 750
Border compliance (USD) 120
Enforcing Contracts (rank) 67
Score of enforcing contracts (0-100) 62.8
Time (days) 530
Cost (% of claim value) 15.2
Quality of judicial processes index (0-18) 7.0
Resolving Insolvency (rank) 149
Score of resolving insolvency (0-100) 303
Recovery rate (cents on the dollar) 213
Time (years) 3.0
Cost (% of estate) 14.5
Outcome (0 as piecemeal sale and 1 as going [1]
concern)
Strength of insolvency framework index (0-16) 5.0
Institutional responsibility: A National Doing
Business Steering Committee (chaired by the
Prime Minister or his delegate) was established
and meets every month to monitor progress in
implementation.
Initial success: Implemented some short-term/
quick-win reforms in the course of 2019 building
on some reforms started earlier.
The way forward: Continue to deeper (medium-
term) reforms during 2020.
to be implemented across 10 indicators and 9
Ministries.
25 /\
DB reforms implemented in the
short-term/up to May 2019
To achieve quick ranking improvements, 8 new laws
and 40 procedural and administrative reforms were
enacted in 5 months. These short-term reforms focused
on quick-wins while laying the ground for a more
ambitious medium and long-term reforms.
. Starting a business
Company name publication requirement removed
Lease/rental agreement requirement removed
OSS at MOTI (covering tax and authentication)
created
* Legal base for the application of software replacing
cash register machine created
eo o =
2. Getting credit
* Directive to include MFIs and leasing companies in
to NBE credit registry system adopted
Credit information system coverage expanded from
0.4% to over 5% of adult population
* Movable properties security rights proclamation
approved
3. Trading across boarder
Electronic single window system piloted
e Deferred payment; pre-arrival & advance ruling
implemented
* Number of documents required for import & export
reduced by 4 (12-10 for export; 11-9 for import)
* Risk level for both import & export improved (more
yellow & green) reducing the need for physical
inspection
E-certificate of origin implemented
4. Paying tax
e E-filling & e-payment on gradual expansion beyond
large tax payers (2,800 e-filling, 25% medium tax
payers)
e Tax payment through banks implemented
* Dedicated medium tax payers branch opened
* Risk-base VAT refund system introduced
N26
. Dealing with construction permit
Online construction permit application platform
piloted
Registered professionals for verifying plans;
inspection and supervision hired
Directives issued to:
* Set time standard to connect to water (3 days) &
sewerage (12 days) for commercial & industrial
clients
* Reduce time to get planning consent from 3
days to 45 minutes
* Reduce the maximum number of days for review
and approval of plan to 13 from 21 days
6. Registering property
Digitalization of majority of title deed - 77.4%
scanned & 22.8% fully digitalized Land plot fully
digitalized
Document requirements, land transactions and
disputes availed online
Notification period on transaction reduced from 30
to 7 days
Time to get tax clearance reduced to 1 day
7. Enforcing contract
Commercial benches expanded (additional 2
benches established at FFIC)
Commercial bench procedure code enacted setting
time standard for court events and introducing new
case management systems
. Getting electricity
Effective tariff information availed online
Working procedure revised to reduce number of
documents required
DB reforms in the pipeline
Starting a business: a legal reform was approved
by the government in November 2019, eliminating
lease agreement and authentication requirements.
In addition, online business licensing system has
been finalized and will be launched in the first
quarter of 2020.
Getting credit: Credit information system has
been expanded further to include Micro-Finance
Institutions (MFIs) and lease companies. Movable
assets as security rights proclamation has been
enacted in August 2019. Currently, collateral
registry system is under development.
Paying tax: VAT amendment proclamation has
beenenactedin November 2019. The proclamation
reduces the frequency of VAT reporting by small
and medium businesses from monthly to quarterly
and the time it takes to refund expenditure on
capital goods. E-filling and e-payment systems are
also being expanded to cover large and medium
taxpayers.
Trading across boarders: The development of
electronic single-window for cross-border trade
hasbeen finalized and will be operational inthe first
half of 2020. The risk-based customs clearance is
also being modified constantly to optimize results.
The government has also decided to eliminate the
mandatory hiring of clearing agents to reduce the
cost and time it takes to start business. Finally, the
freight transport sector, which was previously a
government monopoly, is now open to investment
under the reformed investment laws.
Protecting minority investors and resolving
insolvency: A new Commercial Code has been
prepared (replacing the 60+ years old commercial
code) based on experiences of best practice in
insolvency and protecting minority investors
regime. The Code is expected to be enacted during
2020.
Construction permit: Risk-based inspection
system has been introduced and the process
has been streamlined to reduce time and cost.
Furthermore, legal reforms for insurance and
liability clause have started, including online
application and follow up systems.
Registering property: Online application portal is
being developed to ease the process of registering
property.
Getting electricity: Online application platform is
being developed, which is expected to reduce the
time it takes for installation and make the process
more transparent.
Enforcing Contracts: Specialized commercial
court have been established to deal with
enforcement of contracts. A new commercial
bench proceeding code has also been enacted,
mandating shorter time standard.
27 /\
i
Investment
reforms
A. Reform in Ethiopias investment
legislation
Investment is, without doubt, one of the primary engines
of growth in all economies. The challenge for many
countries, particularly low-income economies, however,
is how to attract quality investment in sufficient quantity.
Ideally, the most viable and sustainable option is to
rely on domestic investment and the domestic private
sector to kick-start and sustain the process of growth and
economic development. Unfortunately, not all countries
have the savings capacity or a strong private sector that
could propel a dynamic investment-growth nexus. Hence
the need to rely on foreign savings and attract Foreign
Direct Investment (FDI). FDI is expected to inject into
the host country not only the capital needed to initiate
investment projects but also bring with it technology,
technical know-how, management skills and global
marketing networks. These elements make attracting FDI
a natural point of departure for countries such as Ethiopia,
seeking to achieve high-level growth and implement a
robust export-led industrialization strategy.
However, attracting quality FDI and retaining it is
neither easy nor straightforward, as is often assumed. It
requires, among other things, a favorable macro policy
environment, specific policies and institutions aimed
at attracting investment, and clearly defined laws and
regulations that are transparent, predictable and easy
to implement. The existing investment regime issued in
2012 (Investment Proclamation No. 769/2012) lacks
these essential features. Thus, during 2019, Ethiopia
initiated major reforms in investment laws and regulations
radically changing the focus, scope and level of openness
of the investment regime.
In January 2020, the Ethiopian parliament approved the
new investment proclamation, marking a major shift
in the countrys policy direction towards investment,
particularly foreign investment. This report will briefly
outline the rational for revising the existing investment
laws and the implications for investment promotion.
What was the rationale for revising
the investment legislation?
Modernize the legal, regulatory and
administrative framework of Ethiopia's
investment regime and investment policy
framework;
Align the investment regime with national
development goals and the recent reforms in
policy direction and priorities;
Revisit and revise the sectoral restrictions
imposed on foreign investment, including on
Ethiopian Diasporas with foreign nationalities;
Establish a more user-friendly investment
regime by moving from a positive to negative
listing approach to identification of sectors and
activities that are open to foreign investors;
Adopt best practice investment promotion,
facilitation and aftercare services and efficient
investment administration system, including
One-Stop-Services; and
Devise a faster and more transparent investor
grievance handling mechanism.
Align the investment regime with the countrys
commitment under African the Continental
Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) and the plans to join
the World Trade Organization (WTO).
Inclusive and consultative approach
to reforms
The revision of the investment laws was conducted
by a team appointed by the EIC. The team, consisting
of investment law experts, policy analysts/advisors,
legal practitioners and researchers, was supervised by
the EIC management, which provided guidance and
reviewed and approved key milestones in the process.
From the start, the approach followed was transparent,
evidence-driven and based on consultations with all
relevant stakeholders.
Kk
In discharging its responsibility, the team used
the following methodological approaches:
Legal analysis
Review of the current and preceding investment
policy, proclamations, regulations, and identify
strengths and limitations;
Benchmarking
In-depth desk research on the evolution and
development of investment laws in several
countries to draw lesson for Ethiopia (about 25
countries);
Empirical evidence
Gathering empirical evidence and data from
international organizations that have wider
perspectivesoninvestmentpolicyandregulations
such as the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD), the World Bank
(WB), the International Financial Corporation
(IFC) with a view to arriving at informed
recommendations;
Consultations with government agencies
Held consultations with high-level officials
from several sectoral Ministries and other public
institutions;
Consultations with sub-regional
investment offices
Held one-to-one consultations with relevant
officials from Oromia, Amhara and Tigray
Regional States;
Feedback from foreign investor associations:
Useful feedback was received from American,
EU, French, Netherlands, Indian, Chinese and
British investor associations;
Survey
A survey was conducted to solicit views and
suggestions from investors in Ethiopia, both
domestic and foreign;
Validation Workshops
Several validation workshops were organized
involving private investors and public sector
actors;
Review of the draft law
Written comments and feedback received
from over 20 Ministries/Agencies and investor
associations.
31_/\
Government commitment to enhance
the role of the private sector in the
economy
Ethiopia has pursued a public investment-led economic
development model since the mid-1990s, reserving a
pro-active role for the government in many sectors of
the economy. Some of the more notable features of the
policies applied include high-level public investmentin
basic infrastructure, in particular transport and energy;
enhancing productivity in smallholder agriculture
through massive investment and extension services;
stimulating consumption-driven growth through
interventionist macroeconomic policies; regulating the
operations of both domestic and foreign enterprises;
promoting economic diversification through the
Agriculture-Development Led Industrialization (ADL)
strategy; and initiating bold and ambitious public
sector projects.
These sets of policies have served Ethiopian
development well over the past two decades and are
the main factors for the countrys impressive economic
growth and outstanding performance in poverty
reduction. Ethiopias growth rate has been consistently
well above the African and global average since
2003 making the country one of the fastest growing
economies in the world. Between 2003 and 2014,
Ethiopia reduced the level of extreme poverty by half
thereby meeting the internationally agreed poverty
reduction goal well before the 2015 Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) deadline.
Building on these initial successes, Ethiopia has
embarked on the next and more demanding stage of
its development process. It has adopted an export-led
industrialization strategy anchored inthe manufacturing
sector. As the country implements this ambitious and
challenging strategy, however, it may prove increasingly
difficult to continue to rely on the same policy mix
and source of growth that has enabled the country
to achieve the recent impressive growth record. The
country needs to shift gear and increase the role of
the private sector in the economy, complementing the
important function that the public sector will continue
to play in building the countrys basic infrastructure,
knowledge-base and macroeconomic stability.
There is a growing recognition of the need for such a
balancing act, particularly by the new administration
under the leadership of Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed
since 2018. Since his appointment as the Prime Minister
in April 2018, Dr Abiy Ahmed has emphasized the need
for a balanced approach to economic development,
particularly the respective roles played by the private
and public sectors in the economy.
N32
In a major speech at the 2019 World Economic Forum
in Davos, the Prime Minister outlined his government's
intention to open up sectors that were previously
closed to foreign investment, consult regularly with
the private sector, and create a business environment
conducive for private investment. He reaffirmed that
the first act towards meeting these objectives would be
to revise Ethiopias investment laws and the regulations
that govern investment activities in Ethiopia.
In addition to reforming investment laws and rules,
other specific policy measures to be taken to enhance
the role of the private sector in the economy include:
PRIVATIZATION:
A programme to privatize State-
owned enterprises (SOEs) has already
been initiated. The objective is to
reduce public sector involvement in
productive and service sectors through
partial equity sales in four strategic
sectors (airlines, telecom, power,
and logistics) and full privatization
of several other SOEs (sugar plants,
railways, industrial parks, etc. );
y/ \ } PUBLIC-PRIVATE
(7S PARTNERSHIPS (PPPs) :
A new policy commitment to
increase public-private partnership,
particularly in the implementation
of large-scale projects. Already, the
government has plans for $7 billion
worth of infrastructure projects to be
implemented through PPPs;
( XK
EASE OF DOING BUSINESS:
To improve Ethiopias standing in
v : : :
the ease of doing business ranking,
which measures the extent to which
countries regulatory environment is
conducive to business operation and
protection of property rights; and
ACTIVE ENGAGEMENT IN
REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL
TRADE AGREEMENTS:
Ethiopia will participate actively
in regional trade negotiations and
intensify the process of accession to
Improvements in the new
investment law
Addressing the limitations of the positive list
approach
One of the most significant adjustments to the existing investment
regime has been the shift from a positive to negative list approach
when classifying sectors or economic activities that are open to foreign
investors. The negative list model identifies and defines exhaustively
the investment areas that are fully or partially restricted to foreign
investors. Experience shows that most investors find this approach more
transparent, predictable and less confusing. It also makes attracting
and facilitating investment relatively easier for host countries.
pS
ANAND TANNA ANANDA D
YY YYW YYYY
definition, scope,
1  and screening
Investment definition
. Recognizes acquisition of shares
. Recognizes all forms of Intellectual Property
Domestic investor status
. Gives a grandfathering protection for
operational investments with domestic
investors status
Jurisdiction
. Extends delegation to Ethiopian
Communication Authority and the National
Bank of Ethiopia
Minimum capital for
foreign investment
($200,000 - $150,000)
. Waives requirement if already fulfilled by
. Exempts existing investments wanting to
main FDI firm and/or PLC
engage in new areas
=
Ethiopian Investment
Commission (EIC)
KAN AAAANIAALALNDRNDL AANAANNAANDANDAA GT
organs
1s
Clarifies mandate (proactive investment promotion,
aftercare, investment climate improvement,
investor feedback loop etc... )
Board (EIB)
. Adds two non-voting private sector representatives.
. Instructs the issuance of procedures for submission
of application, decision making, and dissemination
of decisions
Federal Government and
Regional State
Administrations
Investment Council
. Establishes a Federal-regional Investment
. Clarifies investment land approval
Council chaired by the PM, comprised of
regional presidents, mayors, Investment
Commissioners/Heads
N34
In contrast, the positive list approach
that existed before the recent revision
of the investment regime presents a
list of sectors and activities open to
foreign investment along with an
exhaustive negative list of sectors
reserved for the government and
those reserved for domestic investors.
This tends to create ambiguity,
especially in new and innovative
areas, and gives the perception that
the Ethiopian economy is closed to
foreign investors. By repealing the
existing positive list system and
replacing it by a negative list, the
new investment proclamation has
made it relatively easier to revise the
list over time and as new activities
arise that require foreign investment.
The sector listing in the new
investment proclamation include the
following:
eo Areas reserved for Joint Venture
(JV) with the government;
eo Areas reserved for domestic
investors;
eo Areas reserved for JV with
domestic investors (with equity
cap) and
All investment areas that do not
fall under the investment areas
mentioned above will be open to
foreign investors, subject to legality,
morality and public safety.
To maintain the policy space of the
government in view of the shift
towards a negative list approach,
the Ethiopian Investment Board
is given the authority to allow the
participation of foreign nationals in
areas closed to foreign investors or
restrict the participation of foreign
investors in sectors open for foreign
investment.
Strengthening Coordination
between the EIC and
Regional Investment
Offices
While the EIC is Ethiopia's leading
investment promotion agency and
responsible for the implementation of
the national investment policy under the
supervision of the Ethiopian Investment
Board (EIB), at regional level, the tasks of
facilitating and supporting investors, both
domestic and foreign, are undertaken
by Sub-Regional Investment Offices.
Thus, at the operational level, the role
of Sub-Regional Investment Offices
and governments is critical, making
collaboration with EIC an essential
requirement for efficient implementation
of investment policy.
To strengthen this important relationship,
the new Investment laws have included a
clearly definedlegalbasisforcollaboration
between the EIC and Sub-Regional
Investment Offices. One key innovation
in this regard is the establishment of an
intra-governmental forum (i. e, between
the central government and sub-regional
governments) (IGR Forum) for joint
vision/strategy setting and high-level
problem solving. The IGR Forum is
composed of the Prime Minster and the
Presidents of sub-regional governments
(including the Addis Ababa and Dire
Dawa City Administrations). The 1GR
Forum is expected to iron out investment
facilitation-related challenges as they
arise and as necessary.
3 4 facilitation
One Stop Sho
Services (OSS)
1
2.
Expands service coverage to regions (for
domestic investment)
Adds post-establishment stage (business
license renewal) services
Visa
. Clearly defines EIC facilitation role
. Gives a right to apply for visa from 3rd
country
. Allows 5 years multiple entry investment
visa for owners and shareholders
. Allows 3 years multiple entry investment
visa for general manager, board members
and top managements
4,
Investment permit
issuance, renewal,
and cancelation
administration
. Recognizes online system
. Clearly defines timeline for permit approval,
grounds and process for suspension and revocation
Grievance handling
. Outlines process for grievance handling
o Bases it against final decision of EIC and other
federal agencies
. Sets escalation mechanism to Ethiopian Investment
Board
Dispute
settlement/investment
protection
. Provides Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
J
35 /\
Relaxing the investment sectors open
for Ethiopian Diasporas
Remittances sent by Ethiopian Diasporas currently
constitute a significant source of external financing,
much larger than the other three important sources
of foreign exchange income namely, Overseas
Development Assistance (ODA), FDI and earnings
from exports of goods. However, remittances are
private sector financial flows sent to family members
in Ethiopia for the purposes of supplementing
household income or to finance investment in real
estate. Available evidence suggests that up to 60%
of remittances received by households are used for
consumption purposes and to finance health care and
education.
Harnessing remittances for purposes of investment
 other than consumption  will require targeted
policies and investment laws that make it attractive
for Ethiopian Diasporas to use their savings abroad for
investment in productive sectors in Ethiopia. The new
investment regime has taken steps in this direction.
The new investment laws allow Ethiopian Diasporas,
including those with foreign nationality, to invest in
any sector without restrictions and be on a par with
Ethiopian nationals. In this respect, the new investment
laws will attract not only the diaspora members
savings and investment potential, but also their latent
role as knowledge brokers who could facilitate the
emergence of new trade patterns, technology transfer,
skills and knowledge exchange.
Other Issues Addressed in the new
Investment Proclamation
The new investment proclamation provides clear
provisions on the conditions and procedures for
issuing, renewing, suspension and cancelation of
investment permits. It has also added clear provisions
on investment guarantees and protection and has
elaborated the rules and procedures for handling
investment disputes and grievances raised by investors.
The new proclamation also includes several first
timer provisions that have implications for investment
administration. For example, there are new provisions
on the composition and responsibilities of the Ethiopian
Investment Board (EIB). It also clarifies the mandate of
the EIC and reinforces its role in investment promotion,
facilitation, aftercare, investment climate improvement
etc. Finally, it recognizes online systems of investment
licensing and registration as essential tools for the
administration of investment laws and regulations.
N36
B. Key takeaways under
the new investment legislation
Providing legislative clarity
Theexistinglaw guaranteesinvestorstherighttoemploy
qualified foreigners as managers, supervisors, trainers
and other technical professionals (subject to transfer
of skills and know-how to Ethiopian replacements).
However, in the previous investment regime, neither
the substantive laws nor the procedures were explicit
in terms of how this process is carried out in practice.
To ensure the required level of transparency and
predictability in the system, the new investment
proclamation has substantially expanded the specific
provisions dealing with expat employment. The new
proclamation clarifies the rights and obligations of
foreign investors, detailing the procedures that apply
and specifying the respective roles of line ministries
in delivering the services.
In Ethiopia, investors are permitted to employ
foreigners in top management positions without
adhering to conditions or restrictions that apply to
other expats. However, unfortunately, the previous
investment proclamation did not distinguish between
the different top management positions, for example,
Chief Executive officer (CEQ), Chief Operations
Officer (COQ), Chief Finance Officer (CFO), etc. To
remedy this ambiguity, the new investment legislation
have included an indicative list showing the types of
positions that are considered as top management in
the context of the Ethiopian investment regime.
End-to-end provision of work permit
related services
Under the previous investment laws, EICs One
Stop Shop facility offered work permit related
services (covering issuance, renewal, replacement,
suspension and cancellation of foreign employee
work permits); but this had limited timeframe, i. e. ,
the service was extended only until the investor
obtains the business license or basically enters
into project implementations phase. This led to
unnecessary division of work streams between the
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and the EIC 
causing difficulty in the effective delivery of services
to investors. In recognition of this problem, the new
investment laws have streamlined the process to
enable investors to receive end-to-end services at
the One Stop Shop of the EIC. The Commission shall
provide work permits at any stage of the investment
cycle  representing the Ministry of Labour and Social
Affairs.
Work permit to a co-habiting spouse
As part of making the investment landscape more
attractive to foreign investors and foreign employees
with families, a new substantive right is formulated
under the new proclamation  clearing the possibility
that a work permit may now be issued to a cohabiting
spouse of any investor and a foreign worker.
 Ethiopian
~~ Commission:
Key undertakings
4.
Commission: Key undertakings
A. Online registration and licensing: Keeping up
with time
EIC Online System: As part of the Commissions desire to provide services
via digital platforms, the EIC, in collaboration with the International
Financial Cooperation (IFC), has developed an Online Investment
Services Management System. Through this platform, the Commission
aspires to provide online investment services effectively and efficiently.
The System was developed by an Ethiopia-based IT company with vast
experience in this area. This system can be found on invest-ethiopia. com.
The system was launched in May 2019 and currently provides two
types of services online - Registration of New Investment Permits and
Registration of Expansion of Investments). Eight other services, including
incentive management, commercial registration and other, are currently
at the pilot testing stage and will be operational very soon.
Chinese Portal: The EIC, in collaboration with the Partnership for
Investment and Growth in Africa (PIGA) project, has also developed
a web-portal aimed at providing up-to-date information to potential
Chinese investors. So far, the Chinese portal with translation to English,
has gained the attention of global viewers with more than 43% of the
views originating from China.
7
Scan here to get to
our websites and
services
[|
+e EICs Online
Licensing
System can be
found here.
grr
ALE
[=] English version
of EICs
Chinese Portal
can be found
# Portal can be
k found here.
English | BX
RABREMIET : thF5% LATHE
L.3 BERET j ERUESRA BRINN WE
AEF RRR EMLET?
EMER REET iF BRIDGER BEER
hd omy iid 2013 200) mt Co
B (2019 5) 17 iE ll FDI (
ER BERETEM
EP 
Online Services Offered
Glick on the Title to get information on the requirements of each respective service.
Customer & Commercial Registration
Customers have 0 create their profile be
They can also request for Commercial Registration Corficate.
Cancellation of Investment Permit
service, by spectying
can request Permit
the reason and submitting the required documents.
Amendment of Investment Permit
This service allows customers request changes on existing data and and get
another Investment Permit certificate
Once a project completes its implementation phase, customers can request
for Business License
they can request other services.
Ethiopian Investment Commission Online Portal
ATRS KANTO hORTY RPT W272 Tht TCFA
Dear customer; you need to Register and create an account in order to access our services. If you already have an account, please click Login button, enter your user name and password and access the services of the portal.
New Investment Permit
Once data on basic customer information is completed and approved,
customers can request New Investment Permit certificate.
Investment License Expansion
This service allows customers to expand existing Permit or expand their
existing Business
Tax Holi o
This service allows customers request Tax Holiday incentive support for their
sligible projects
Help Home Contact Login 2 Registe)
og 2 Reg
Renewal of Investment Permit
Once data on basic customer infarmation is completed, cutomers with
existing Investment Permit can renew their Investment Permit
Investment Permit Substitute
This service allows customers get a replacement of their Investment Permit
certificate
Duty Free Incentive
This service allows customers to request Duty Free incentive support for
their sligible projects
TARAS AVIA BO
Ethiopia: a New Horizon of
Hope
Ethiopia: a Growth Miracle (Deloitte)
ETHIOPIA INVESTING IN ETHIOPIA
One of the world's fastest growing
THE HIGHEST GROWTH RATE IN
AFRICA
An attractive textile industry
WORLD LARGEST RECIPIENT OF
FDI IN APPAREL AND TEXTILE (INFLOWS)
INDUSTRY
SUPPORT SYSTEM
Why Ethiopia?
Amanufacturing hub
2 wz ww ww ws ww
wos ie 1s 1
OUR ASSISTANCE
SHARE OF MANUFACTURING FDI
OPPORTUNITIES
The world's best destination for
tourists
EB gp a wd gd ge
NUMBER OF INTERNATIONA]
TOURISTS (IN THOUSANDS)
B. Partnership-driven investment
promotion: Partnership for
Investment and Growth in
Africa (PIGA) Project
PIGA is part of the Manufacturing Africa (MA) initiative
that the Department for International Development
(DFID) of the UK established to facilitate the flow
of foreign direct investment with high development
impact into selected African countries.
PIGA is a multi-national programme aimed at
contributing to job creation and sustainable growth
in Ethiopia, Kenya, Mozambique and Zambia by
supporting these countries to attract foreign direct
investment, specifically Chinese investment, in the
agro-processing and light manufacturing sectors. PIGA
is also designed to enhance the capacity of these
countries in investment promotion.
PIGA is implemented by the International Trade Centre
(ITC), a UN body based in Geneva, in cooperation with
the China Council for the Promotion of International
Trade (CCPIT) and the ChinaAfrica Development Fund
(CADFund) as well as investment promotion agencies
in each of the programme countries. In Ethiopia, ITC
partners with the Ethiopian Investment Commission
(EIC) for the implementation of the project.
Project achievements in Ethiopia:
Output 1:
Generating business
leads
* Since the start of the project implementation
period in 2017, PIGA has been actively engaged in
promoting Ethiopia, through a series of investment
promotion activities, as an attractive destination to
Chinese investment. These efforts have generated
close to 27 promising investment leads with an
estimated total value of over US$2.5 billion. The
promotion activities are focused mainly in the
pharmaceutical, medical equipment, textile and
paper processing sectors. It is estimated that the
investment interest expressed to date has the
potential to generate more than 35,000 jobs.
e Four leads with a total value of about US$2.3
billion have progressed into MoU signing stages
{$2 billion of this is represented by a mega scale
bamboo pulp & paper project proposed by Taison
Group and partners).
e One of the four MoU stage leads has been
converted into an actual investment, with a large
state-owned Chinese textile & apparel company
registering its investment in Ethiopia for about US$
12 million (representing only the first phase of the
investment project).
e The PIGA programme has enabled the EIC and
Ethiopia to shift from a reactive to proactive and
targeted approach to investment attraction and
promotion. EIC and other government officials have
taken an active part in 14 investment promotion
events and 6 sector specific roadshows that PIGA
organized in the last two years.
Output 2: .
Strengthening capacities to
deliver investment
* Developed and launched a Chinese language on-
line portal for investment promotion;
e Hired a qualified native Chinese speaker to be
posted in the EIC China Desk
* Developed five business cases for investments in
priority sectors of textile & apparel, leather, and
agro-processing
e Trained and coached more than 30 EIC staff in
assessing market potential, pitching investment
opportunities, negotiating with investors, and
handling inward/outward investment missions
* Developed a prototype for an FDI Tracking Tool
to improve investor data tracking and servicing,
and implementation started for a full-fledged
deployment in April 2020.
Output 3:
Overcoming FDI obstacles and
enabling knowledge sharing
PIGA has developed a Sustainable investment
handbook for investments in Ethiopia to provide
investors with a step-by-step guide on how to comply
with all mandatory requirements and implement
additional sustainability practices for agro-processing
and light manufacturing.
C. Building the next generation
Ethiopian technocrats
EICs Young Professionals
Development Programme (YPDP)
The gap between expected outcomes of national
policies and development plans and actual
implementation and effective delivery is one of the
challenges facing the Ethiopian economy. A key factor
for the limited implementation capacity is the lack of
sufficient qualified personnel with the right experience
and competences to translate policy action-lines
into action. To remedy this binding constraint, in
2016, the EIC introduced the donor-supported Young
Professionals Development Programme (YPDP).
The objective of the YPDP is to recruit fresh university
graduates for training within the EIC through mentoring
by senior officials, training by instruction, learning by
doing and observing, and through exposure to the day-
to-day investment promotion and facilitation activities
that take place at the EIC. The training programme
is rigorous and tailored to create highly competent
professionals who will enable the EIC to deliver on its
mandates and responsibilities: at the same time, the
young professionals develop the experience and skills
that they require for career progression either within
the EIC or other institutions or sectors.
The programme is implemented in collaboration with
Enterprise Partners (EP). The EIC is grateful to DFID and
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation for providing the
finances required to start the programme. The extra-
budgetary financing has enabled the EIC to recruit the
best and the brightest from among the young university
graduates by offering a pay structure compatible with
the private sector. Ultimately, the solution to attracting
the best graduates and the necessary skills and talent
into the public sector lies in the ongoing civil service
reforms. Hopefully in the near future, institutions
such as the EIC will not need extra-budgetary support
from donors to be able to recruit the best among the
young graduates. In the short-term, however, the EIC
pioneering initiative seems to have provided a solution
to skill-related constraints to implementation of
policies and institutional mandates.
Achievements and potential
lessons
The second cohort of the YPDP program graduated
in December 2019. Since the introduction of the
programme, the Young Professionals (YPs) have become
an integral part of EIC, contributing and delivering on
core areas such as investment promotion, facilitation,
retention, support to investors in industrial parks and
assisting in dispute settlement. They are discharging
their responsibilities working closely with other regular
staff and while acquiring new skills and experience.
The presence of YPs in the EIC has injected new
dynamism and skills, particularly in the application
of new technologies and software for improving the
services provided by the Commission. The fact that
the EIC is now able to handle an increasing number
of investors and their demands in a timely manner
is attributed to the contributions made by the YPs.
Obviously, there are lessons for other institutions from
this innovative scheme for tackling the short-term
constraints to effective implementation and delivery of
43 /J\
NA2
D: The Objectives of Jobs Compact
Programme
According to the United Nations High Commission for
Refugees (UNHCR), in 2019, the number of refugees in
the world had reached nearly 69 million. It is estimated
that about 85 percent of them are hosted by other
developing countries that are themselves low-income
and still at an early stage of development. One of these
host countries is Ethiopia, which is home to over a
million refugees, the largest number of refugees than
any other African countries. Some of the refugees have
resided in Ethiopia for more than a decade without
immediate prospect of returning home or moving on
to other destinations.
To ensure that the refugees enjoy a productive and
dignified life while staying in Ethiopia, the government
has established a special programme  Jobs Compact
Programme (JCP)  to explore ways in which refugees
and Ethiopians seeking employment could obtain
decent jobs and engage in economic activities that
supports their livelihood. The JCP is supported by
development partners and coordinated by the EIC,
which also serves as implementing agency working
closely with other public institutions, most notably
the Administration for Refugees and Returnees Affairs
{ARRA), the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
{MoLSA) and the Industrial Parks Development
Corporation (IPDC).
Key components of the programme
include:
e Creating economic opportunities for Ethiopians
and Refugees who reside in Ethiopia. The support
offered includes providing the legal basis for
refugees to take up employment opportunities. The
programme also provides additional support in
housing, skills development, employer/employee
matching, and oversight to ensure that refugees
and Ethiopians rights and wellbeing are upheld.
e Improving the broader investment climate. The
Government has prioritized significant investments
in transport logistics and power to help crowd-in
private investment. In addition, a One Stop Shop
(OSS) service (labour units in industrial parks) have
been introduced along with a Client Charter on
the turnaround and investor registration processes.
Strengthening investment promotion capability
is another important support provided by the
programme..
EL
Improving labor productivity and quality of jobs.
An important component of the programme is
improving worker skills and reducing levels of
absenteeism and turnover. Much of the Ethiopian
labour force is new to both the formal sector and
factory-based work and the transition will need
carefully targeted policies that improve labour
sourcing, grading, and the provision of soft and
technical skills training. It also includes creating
good working conditions and providing adequate
social infrastructure for workers in industrial parks.
Fulfilling these conditions will improve labour
productivity.
Enhancing the sustainability of existing industrial
parks. Ethiopia's reputation for sustainable and
inclusive development is both an important end
by itself and a prominent part of the brand for
investment promotion. The commitment to carbon
neutral growth, zero liquid discharge facilities at the
Hawassa industrial park, and other investments have
played an important part in reinforcing the parks
sustainability. Future activities will include seeking
innovative approaches to rainfall capture and solar
power generation, and adherence to global best
practice in social compliance in both industrial park
construction and protection of the workforce in the
textile sector (predominately female).
15 4
Tourism:
Time to reveal
the hidden
potential of
5.
Tourism: Time to reveal
the latent potential of Ethiopia
Over the last two years, the Government of Ethiopia
has taken bold steps to promote the tourism sector as
a priority area and transform Ethiopia into one of the
preferred tourist destinations in Africa.
Tourism forms one of the priority sectors identified for
economic competitiveness and job creation under the
home-grown economic reform agenda and the Ten-
year perspective plan.
In June 2018, Ethiopia launched an e-visa regime,
allowing travelers to process visa requirements online.
In November 2018, the Government decided to extend
a visa on arrival regime for almost all African travelers
 making it possible for African travelers to have easy
mobility and stopover in Ethiopia. This has moved
Ethiopia's ranking in the AfDBs Africa Visa Openness
Index from 50th in 2018 to 18th in 2019.
In August 2019, Ethiopia launched two new strategies
for the development of Stopover and Meetings
Incentives Conferences and Exhibitions (MICE)
tourism. The strategies aim to place Ethiopia among
the most competitive destinations on Stopover and
MICE tourism leveraging the various assets the country
already has including its globally leading national
airline - Ethiopian Airlines - as well as Addis Ababas
strategic hub position not only in air-traffic but also as
a Pan-African diplomatic and political hub.
In October 2019, Ethiopia inaugurated and opened
for visitors Unity Park which is located in Ethiopia's
National Grand Palace. The Park has various attractions,
including historical buildings, indigenous plants
exhibition, indigenous black mane lion zoo, a green
area, regions pavilion and over 1000 displayed items.
The concerted reform efforts taken by the Government
of Ethiopia has been fully recognized in global
platforms with increased attention being given to the
country by the international media and global awards
coming into Ethiopia.
[=] Th [=] The e-visa platform
AR =fg=" can be accessed by
scanning this
gr-code.
GD) e-VISA
7 ETHIOPIA
The Ethiopia Visa is an electronic travel authorization which allows visitors to enter the country. It is available to citizens of all countries and it has
eliminated the need to physically go to an embassy or consulate or queue at the border for a visa. The application is completed online and only takes a
matter of minutes.
What is the Ethiopian Visa?
The Ethiopian Online Visa was launched to accelerate the process of obtaining a visa for Ethiopia. Citizens from all
countries can quickly complete the online application form by answering a series of basic questions.
Applications are normally processed within 24 hours though on rare occasions the process can take up to three (3) days.
Once approved the Visa is sent to the applicant by email.
Travelers can present their eVisa, along with their passport, to the Ethiopian berder authorities at Addis Ababa Bole
International Airport to gain entry. The electronic visa for Ethiopia is a single-entry visa and applicants have the choice of
either a 30-day or 90-day visa.
Who needs a visa for Ethiopia?
The vast majority of travelers need a visa for Ethiopia to be able to enter. Citizens of Kenya can enter without a visafor periods of up to a year and citizens of
Djibouti can enter for a period of up to three (3) months visa-free. These are the only two visa-exempt nationalities.
The Ethiopia eVisa has effectively eliminated the need to queue at the border for a visa on arrival as the application can be completed in advance. The eVisa is
available to eligible passport-holders from every country.
49 /\
A brief
summary
of sectoral
studies
conducted by
the EIC
6.
A brief summary of sectoral
studies conducted by the EIC
The pharma industry
The annual pharmaceutical market in Ethiopia is estimated
to be worth ~US$ 500 million and growing at a rate of 25%
per annum. However, Ethiopia is still highly dependent
on imports for the supply of pharmaceutical products.
Local manufacturers have limited production capabilities
and the product ranges produced locally is narrow. It is
estimated, for example, that local producers supply only
90 of more than 380 products that are on the national list
of essential medicines. The lack of domestic productive
capacity limits the availability of affordable and easily
accessible medicines to Ethiopia's growing population of
more than 110Million.
Ethiopia has also a growing domestic medical devices
market (composed of medical instruments/apparatus,
supplies and equipment), with imports expected to grow
to US$383 million (2020) or about 96% of the total
demand for medical devices. The government, through
the Ethiopian Pharmaceutical Supply Agency (EPSA) is the
largest customer, representing 97% of the total market.
The Tony Blair Institute for Global Change (TBI) has
supported the EIC and other agencies in conducting
analytical studies to assess the potential for manufacturing
medical supplies and instruments/apparatus in Ethiopia;
current opportunities and challenges; and the reforms
required to improve the sector, particularly in attracting
FDI and developing the capabilities for import substitution
and eventually exports.
The rationale for conducting a study on the medical
supplies and instruments/apparatus are:
e The rapid increase in health coverage in Ethiopia led
by massive public investment in the health sector to
meet the increasing demand for health care services
by a growing population. In 2015, there were 17,154
health posts across the country and additional 438
were under construction. There were also 4,063
health centres and 68 were under construction. The
number of hospitals in the country 381 and additional
218 were under construction. Most of the facilities
under construction at that time are now finished and
operational. Predictably, the rapid increase in health
care facilities, including at referral hospital level, has
generated a growing demand for medical supplies,
instruments/apparatus, and equipment.
N52
* The choice for the government is to either
continue to rely on imports to meet the
growing demand for medical supplies or
set in motion the policies and incentives
required to encourage investment in
import substitution of medical supplies
and instruments. The government has
identified the pharmaceutical sector
in general as a priority area for import
substitution and the study by TBI
contributes towards that objective by
assessing the feasibility for producing
medical supplies and instruments in
Ethiopia.
Ethiopia does not have a strategy on medical
devices and instruments/apparatus per se.
However, the Government has put forward an
ambitiousnationalhealthsectortransformation
plan and a strategy for the development of
the pharmaceutical industry. Achieving both
these objectives will require steady progress
in the countrys domestic capability to
produce medical devices and instruments/
apparatus. In this respect, the study on
medical devices has been extremely helpful
in mapping what the government needs to do
to boost domestic capacity for manufacturing
of medical devices and instruments. For
example, the study has identified the
fiscal and non-fiscal incentives required to
encourage investment in import substitution
of medical devices. The recommendations
are now being considered by the Ministry of
Finance, which is responsible for reviewing
the countrys incentive system. Similarly,
other recommendations covering areas such
as the improvement of industry-focused skills,
strengthening regulatory and certification
procedures, and investment financing
options are also under consideration. Some
of these measures will enable the country
to acquire the capability to meet the Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) certification
requirements, which is essential if Ethiopia is
to develop a medical devices manufacturing
capacity that meets international standards.
The agro-processing sector
In2019, the EIC, in collaboration with the Ethiopian
Agricultural Transformation Agency (ATA), initiated
a study on the Food and Beverage Processing and
Auxiliary Industries (FBPAI). The main objectives
of the study were two-fold: to assess the level of
development of the Food and Beverage Processing
and supporting industries in Ethiopia; and to
develop a strategy for attracting investment into the
industry, including the development of effective
domestic supply chain.
Although the Food and Beverage industry has
been growing consistently over the past decade, its
contribution to the countrys GDP remains small.
At present, the industry accounts for only 2 percent
of GDP. However, domestic demand for processed
food products has been growing fast in recent
years outpacing the capacity of the local industries
to meet local demand. This has forced the country
to increasingly rely on imports. In 2017, the total
cost of imported processed food and beverages
accounted for US$ 465 Million.
The FBPAI study focuses in two areas: landscape
analysis and value-chain-specific analysis. The
landscape analysis evaluates the current landscape
of the Food & Beverage Processing Industry
focusing on the actors/institutions and policies/
regulations, including an assessment of the existing
challenges and providing recommendations for
enhancing the capacity of local industries. The
value-chain-specific analysis focuses on a rigorous
and phased prioritization process and identified
five high-potential value chains, namely, Red
Meat, Poultry, Edible Oil, Wheat, and Fruit Juice.
Deep dives were developed for each value chain
that assessed the market opportunities, challenges
across the value chain and improvement areas.
The strategy has identified over 5.25 million Ha of
land to provide opportunities for the development
of selected commodities in the value chains.
In short, the strategy that the EIC and ATA
developed has multiple objectives: to identify key
opportunities and recommend on how to attract
investment and transform the value chains in food
processing and beverages; develop local capacity
to meet domestic demand for processed foods
and beverages; and make Ethiopia competitive
in the export market by learning from best
practices in other countries, leveraging existing
natural resources, creating enabling policy and
institutional environment and implementing the
recommended interventions across value chains.
Fruit Juice: Although Ethiopia is the 5th largest
producer of fruits in the African continent, it does
not have price competitiveness in fruit juice and
concentrate production. The strategy recommends
a two-phase approach: Phase 1: promoting local
processing capacity (importing pulp and concentrate)
and increasing fruit production (yield and volume). This
will be followed by Phase 2: end-to-end processing
with a view to gradually discontinuing import of pulp
and concentrate for processing and making Ethiopia
competitive in the export market.
Red Meat: Ethiopia has the 2nd largest population of
livestock in the continent, ranking 6th globally, yet has
relatively low exports of red meat. Ethiopia is currently
unable to compete in the international market due to
high cost of production. The new strategy recommends
commercial ranching to ensure consistent supply of
livestock, reduce the involvement of middle-men in
marketing and introduce regulations and standards
that will upgrade Ethiopia's competitiveness in
international markets.
Wheat: Ethiopia currently imports about 19 percent of
the national wheat consumed in the country, which
accounts for 36 percent of local demand for processed
wheat. This requires large amounts of foreign currency,
which the lacks because of slow growth in exports.
Reliance on imports also distorts local prices and can
create supply shortages when foreign exchange in
short supply. In line with the Government of Ethiopia's
goal of making the country wheat self-sufficient by
2023, the strategy proposes an additional 23,000 ha
of land to be allocated for production of wheat (either
in the lowlands or through salinity improvement in
the highlands). In addition, large scale processors are
needed to meet the demand gap in existing final goods
processing.
Poultry: Ethiopia is far behind in utilizing its abundant
chicken resources efficiently. The country has the
potential to become competitive in the global market
due to its low processing and operational costs,
if limitations in feed and cost of day-old-chickens
(DOCs) are addressed. The strategy proposes a two-
phase approach; Phase 1: import substitution, and
Phase 2: exporting to international markets based on
meeting quality and standard requirements.
Edible Oils: Ethiopia has abundant resources suitable
for oilseed production, but due to limited edible oil
production capacity, over 90% of local demand
is met through imports (mainly palm oil). Ethiopia
can become competitive in edible oil by addressing
challenges in raw material sourcing, packaging and
processing efficiency. To achieve this, a two-phased
strategic direction has been recommended; Phase 1:
enhancing local primary and secondary processing
capacity through import of crude palm and soft oils
while increasing local production of oilseeds and end-
to-end local processing, and Phase 2: increasing local
processing capability and efficiency and becoming
over time a net exporter of edible oils.
Auxiliary Industry: to ensure the success of the food
and beverage processing industry, it is imperative to
develop the local capacity of the auxiliary industries
that support the sector. To this end, cold chain
transportation, packaging and storage were identified
to be the most critical challenges across value chains.
Addressing the bottlenecks in these three auxiliary
industries will greatly enhance the efficiency and
effectiveness of the supply chain in the industry. The
recommendation to allow FDI in cold chain business
has been endorsed by parliament as part of the recently
new investment laws. It is hoped that this policy
adjustment will help boost investment into one of the
important value chains in the industry.
55 /\
The Oxford Handbook of Industrial Hubs and Economic Development
Arkebe Oqubay and Justin Yifu Lin,
Oxford University Press, May 2020 [ 1,232 Pages; ISBN: 9780198850434]
Inthe lasttwo decades, Ethiopia has pursued an export-led industrialization strategy, anchored in the manufacturing
sector and supported by a new generation of sustainable industrial parks as part of the strategy. Globally,
industrialization, supported by industrial hubs, has been widely associated with structural transformation and
catch-up. There are about 6,000 industrial hubs (special economic zones, export processing zones, industrial
parks, technology parks etc) spread across 147 countries, with a high concentration in developing and emerging
economies, particularly in Asia. While the short-term economic benefits (such as exports, employment, and
revenues from taxes) of industrial hubs are important, their value lies first and foremost in their role as incubators
of manufacturing firms and technological capability building.
The appeal of industrial hubs as instruments of export-led industrialization is likely to grow in Africa. The success
of a few countries, such as Ethiopia, in using industrial parks as springboards for participation in Global Value
Chains (GVCs) has generated heightened interest and curiosity on industrial hubs as instruments of investment
and industrial policy. It is important, therefore, to have a thorough and comprehensive understanding of industrial
hubs and their impact on economic development, particularly the implications for job creation, attracting
investment, building export capacity, technology transfer, gender equality, sustainable development and boosting
domestic productive capacity through linkages. All these issues are addressed in a forthcoming Handbook on
Industrial Hubs edited by Dr Arkebe Oqubay and Professor Justin Lin and to be published by Oxford university
Press. The Oxford Handbook of Industrial Hubs and Economic Development is a well-research volume that
applies an inter-disciplinary approach to examine the conceptual underpinnings and operational imperatives of
industrial hubs.
The Handbook reviews empirical evidence from different regions and economies and extracts pertinent lessons
for both policymakers and researchers. It illustrates the diverse and complex nature of industrial hubs, and
shows how they promote industrialization, economic structural transformation, and technological catch-up.
The Handbook also explores the interface between industrial hubs and emerging issues and trends such as
environmental protection and sustainability, technological advancement, the shifts in the global economy, and
urbanization. The concluding chapter emphasizes the centrality of learning and latecomer advantages.
The main objectives of the Handbook are: to examine the conceptual underpinnings and research methodologies
associated with industrial hubs and economic development; to extract, from empirical evidence, relevant policy
lessons for researchers and practitioners; and to provide alternative perspectives and approaches on industrial
hubs, embedded in an industrial policy framework and linked to the process of structural transformation and
technological catch-up. The Handbook includes over fifty chapters written by eminent scholars and researchers
with an in-depth knowledge of the role, impact and the strength and weaknesses of industrial hubs. Their
contribution provides conceptual clarity on the term industrial hub, which is a generic term often used to
describe a variety of specially designated sites that countries establish to incubate manufacturing enterprises -
such as industrial parks, special economic zones, industrial districts, export-processing zones and technology
parks.
The Handbook is organized under seven themes: theories and methodologies; context and historical perspective;
gender and environmental sustainability; policy and practices in Asian, Latin American, and African economies;
and future pathways.
Authors bio
Arkebe Ogqubay, PhD, is a Senior
Minister and Special Adviser to the
Prime Minister of Ethiopia and has been
at the centre of policymaking for over
twenty-five years. He currently serves
as board chair of several leading public
organizations and international advisory
boards. His recent works (published by
Oxford University Press) include the
path-breaking Made in Africa: Industrial
Policy in Ethiopia; The Oxford Handbook
of the Ethiopian Economy; How Nations
Learn: Technological Learning, Industrial
Policy, and Catch-up; China-Africa and
an Economic Transformation; African
Economic Development: Evidence,
Theory, and Policy; and The Oxford
Handbook of Industrial Policy.
Justin Yifu Lin is Dean of the Institute
of New Structural Economics and
Institute of South-South Cooperation
and Development, and Professor and
Honorary Dean of the National School
of Development at Peking University. He
was the Senior Vice President and Chief
Economist at the World Bank, 2008-12.
He is the author of more than 20 books,
including Beating the Odds: Jump-
starting Developing Countries; Going
Beyond Aid: Development Cooperation
for Structural Transformation; The
Quest for Prosperity: How Developing
Economies Can Take Off; New Structural
Economics: A Framework for Rethinking
Development and Policy; Against the
Consensus: Reflections on the Great
Recession; and Demystifying the Chinese
Economy.
ARKEBE
OQUBAY
JUSTIN YIFU
LIN
The Oxtord Handbook of
57 IN
MWETC
exe Arantert hola