ETHIOPIAN
INVESTMENT
REPORT

ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
 Ethiopian Investment Commission
P. O. Box 2313, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Tel: +251 11 551 0033
Email: ethioinvest@investethiopia. gov. et
Website: www. investethiopia. gov. et
Series no: 2/18
Published by EIC with the support of the World Bank
Group's (WBG) - Investment Climate Program
01
Contents
Message from the
Commissioner
Acronyms
01. Introduction
1.1 Opportunities
for investment
1.2 Infrastructure
and utilities
12
24
03. Insight in to
Ethiopia's Industrial
Parks Development
Program
3.1 Background:
Industrial Parks (IP)
program launch
and strategic role
3.2 Progress in IP
development so far
3.3 IP regulatory
framework
3.4 Hawassa Industrial
Park - a flagship and
model project
a4
44
45
48
51
05 Ethiopia: Global
Recognition for
Excellence in
Investment
Promotion
02
04
02. FDI Trends 33
2.1 FDI size and
growth ag
2.2 Distribution
by sector 37
04. The Policy and
Regulato
Framework for
Investment 75
4.1 Policies and
regulations 7%
4.2 General measures
affecting FDI 78
4.3 Investment
administration 84
06. Key Contacts 91
Message from the Commissioner
Ethiopia continues to stride on its rapid economic growth
performance - sustaining the double digit growth trend
of the past 14 years with broad contributions from all
economic sectors. At the same time, foreign investment
showed continued increase in the past decade - reaching
a record USD 4.2 billion in 2016/17. This is a great leap
compared to investment flows that were under half
a billion USD in 2005/6 and under USD 1.2 billion in
2010/11 where it has quadrupled in not more than five
years. The combined reading of these trends shows that
Ethiopia is on the right path to becoming Africa's prime
investment destination.
EIC's role in this regard has been very instrumental; such
inclusive and remarkable economic outcome is achieved
among others, due to a number of investment enhancing
measures - including the development of industrial parks
in various parts of the country, and as a follow-up two the
Industrial Parks Proclamation the coming in to force of the
Industrial Parks Regulation and Directive as well asin recent
years the adoption of targeted investor recruitment strategies.
In addition comprehensive investment climate reforms by
Gok attracted both domestic and foreign entrepreneurs
to invest in the country. A flagship achievement of the
past two years has been the successful development of
Industrial Parks in various parts of the country. We started
by witnessing a record time completion of Hawassa
Industrial Park (HIP) that attracted more than eighteen
globally renowned textile and apparel manufactures as
well as local enterprises followed by Kombolcha and
Mekelle Industrial Parks.
As testimony to such achievement the country received high
remarks and global recognitions from various international
development agencies including The United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and
the World Bank Group. In November of last year UNCTAD
awarded Ethiopia its annual award for promoting investment
in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Similarly,
the World Bank Group recognized Ethiopia through its
Star Reformer Award for its outstanding performance
on investment policy reform and promotion.
The enhanced coordination among relevant government
agencies has been key to the successes recorded in the
past few years. Among others, coordination among EIC,
IPDC, Mol, with a guidance from Ethiopian Investment
Board and the Prime Minister's Office was indispensable
for the timely and successful development of the HIP, KIP
& MIP. Expectedly, this remarkable collaborative trend will
continue in the coming years as well to ensure the timely
completion of various industrial park development projects
thatare now under different phases of construction both
by public and private sector players.
With all the pieces coming together, Ethiopia's transformation
agenda is gaining momentum and the country is heading
to a real economic transformation through diversifying
its economy and enhancing its FDI portfolio to realize
its vison of becoming the leading manufacturing hub in
Africa by 2025.
AGOA: African Growth and Opportunities Act
ATA: Agricultural Transformation Agency
COMESA: Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
CRGE: Climate-Resilient Green Economy
DFQF: Duty Free Quota Free
EBA: Everything But Arms
EIB: Ethiopian Investment Board
EIC: Ethiopian Investment Commission
EIPO: Ethiopian Intellectual Property Office
EIR: Ethiopian Investment Report
EPA: Environmental Protection Authority
ET: Ethiopian Airlines
EU: European Union
FDI: Foreign Direct Investment
GDP: Gross Domestic Product
GERD: Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam
GoE: Government of Ethiopia
GSP: Generalized System of Preferences
GTP: Growth and Transformation Plan
HIP: Hawassa Industrial Park
ICC: International Chamber of Commerce
ILO: International Labor Organization
IMF: International Monetary Fund
IP: Industrial Park
IPDC: Industrial Parks Development Corporation
KIP: Kombolcha Industrial Park
LDC: Lease Developed Countries
LLDCs: Land Locked Developing Countries
MIP: Mekelle Industrial Park
MOI: Ministry of Industry
MW: Mega Wats
SME: Small and Medium Enterprises
TVET: Technical and Vocational Education and Trainings
UN: United Nations
UNCTAD: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
USA: United States of America
WB: World Bank Group
WIPO: World Intellectual Property Organization
WTO: World Trade Organization
SAUDI ARABIA
SUDAN
Adwa o
Aksum, O Adigra
oGonder
DJIBOUTI
Amhara Dese
Markos
 Degehabur
Somali
oKebri Dehar
Sa
ake
Rudolf
JGANDA
Ethiopia at glance
Official name
Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia
Legislature
Federal Parliamentary Assembly
(Upper house - House of Federation,
Lower house - House of Peoples
Representative)
Surface area
1,133,380 sg. km
Climatic conditions
Ethiopian highlands enjoy subtropical,
temperate and alpine climates with
average annual temperatures under
20C. Lowland areas experience tropical,
arid and semi arid temperatures.
GDP (2017 estimate) (nominal)
$76.9 billion
Current constitution
August 1995
Political system
Federal state with multi-party
parliamentarian democracy
Head of state
President Mulatu Teshome (Dr)
Head of government
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed (PhD)
Currency
Birr
Country code
+251
Population (2017)
Appx 100 million
GDP per capita -PPP (2017)
$2,070
Time zone
GMT +3
Drives
On the right
Life expectancy (2017)
65
Altitude
From 120m bellow see
level to 4600m
01 Introduction
Ethiopia has continued to capture headlines as a top
economic performer in the world and the countrys continued
strong economic performance is expected to reach yet
another milestone in the coming years. As confirmed by
multiple high-profile reports from the World Bank, IMF
and UNCTAD Ethiopia is headed to be one of the top
performing economies in the world in 2017 and 2018.
The World Bank Global Economic Prospect (2017)
forecasted that the country grew by 8.3 percentin 2017,
making it one of the fastest growing economy in the world.
Similarly, in its World Economic Outlook (2017), the IMF
indicated that Ethiopia remained to be a star performer
in the African continent in 2017.
Similarly Ethiopia has seen a steady growth in FDI flows in
the last several years and 2017 has been another record
year for FDI flow into the country. UNCTAD Investment
Report 2017 shows that Ethiopia has become an investment
hotspot in Africa and while FDI flows to the rest of the
continent continued to decline, Ethiopia attracted more
FDI than ever before in 2016. With a record growth of
46 percent FDI flow, the country has become one of the
largest recipients of FDI in the continentand the second
largest LDC host economy.
A crucial component of Ethiopia's drive for growth
and transformation is the development of a vibrant
manufacturing and industrial base. A key component of
the countrys economic transformation plan is the vison
to become the light manufacturing leader in Africa.
The Government is making significant steps towards
achieving this vision. Between 2016 and 2017, Ethiopia
inaugurated the Hawassa Industrial Park- the largest
specialized Textile and Apparel Park in Africa, Kombolcha
Industrial Park and Mekelle Industrial parks, while it has
recently completed the construction of Adama and Dire
Dawa Industrial Parks. All these industrial parks are at the
crossroads of well-developed expressway and railway
connections providing the necessary connectivity. With
clear national vision, skilled and abundant workforce,
the most competitive energy cost in the world and
streamlined one-stop government services, the opportunity
is immense. Ethiopia sees industrial parks investment
in strategic locations and sectors as generator of more
jobs, accelerator of increased and diversified exports,
earner of foreign currency, means for greater transfer of
technology and stimulator of socially and environmentally
responsible urban development. The development of
industrial parks has been a marked success in attracting
and facilitating high quality investment.
The countrys achievements in successfully attracting
productive foreign directinvestment has been credited by
key international institutions including the World Bank and
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD). Government of Ethiopia recently received a
Star Reformer Award from the World Bank Group for its
outstanding performance on investment policy reform and
promotion as well as UNCTAD's Excellence In Promoting
Investment In The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Such recognition from the two leading global development
organizations is a clear testament that Ethiopia isindeed
on the right course in realizing its vision of becoming a
leading manufacturing hub in Africa by 2025.
In particular, the sustainable features of Ethiopia's
industrialization agenda, as depicted in the design,
construction and operation of Industrial Parks were highly
commended as exemplary for other countries. Ethiopia's
deliberate policy choice to promote labour-intensive
industries such as textile and apparel that provide job
opportunities for youth and create equal opportunities for
women; its compliance with high social and environmental
standards on the development and operation of industrial
parks; its targeted investor recruitment strategy and
attraction of leading global firms; and its dedicated effort
in establishing the OSS and other investor-friendly reforms
all contributed to these recognations.
Testimonial
World Bank Global Economic Prospects (June 2017)
outlined despite a fragile global economy prospects,
growth in Sub-Saharan Africa is recovering, supported by
modestly rising commodity prices, strengthening external
demand, and the end of drought in a number of countries.
Security threats have subsided in several countries. Several
factors are preventing a more robust recovery.
Yet, in contrast to oil and metals prices, some commodity
prices have plummeted, e. g. cacao, reducing exports and
fiscal revenues in Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, and other cocoa
producers. The droughtin East Africa has also continued
into 2017, adversely affecting economic activity in Kenya,
and contributing to famine in Somalia and South Sudan.
However, the region is expected to have positive outlook.
Growth in Sub-Saharan Africa is forecast to pick up to 2.6
percent in 2017 and to 3.2 percent in 2018, predicated
on moderately rising commodity prices and reforms to
tackle macroeconomic imbalances. Most importantly
growth in non-resource intensive countries is anticipated
to remain solid, supported by infrastructure investment,
resilient services sectors, and the recovery of agricultural
production.
Among SSA economics with positive growth trajectory the
star performer is Ethiopia. Ethiopia is forecast to expand by
8.3 percentin 2017, Tanzania by 7.2 percent, Cete d'Ivoire
by 6.8 percent, and Senegal by 6.7 percent. According to
the report In non-resource intensive countries, growth
should remain robust. Large low-income countries in
Sub-Saharan Africa (e. g. , Ethiopia, Tanzania) will expand
at a rapid pace, helped by buoyant service sectors,
infrastructure investment, and a rebound in agriculture?
WHGS3
WHGS4
WHGSUG
Maize
Domestic saving and investment
It is the Government of Ethiopia's (Gok) strategy that
Ethiopia's economy should grow atan annual growth rate
of more than 10 percent for no less than two decades
if the country is to attain the projected middle income
country status by the year 2025. Meanwhile, Ethiopia's
gross domestic savings as proportion of GDP has been
historically quite low. Since it will be difficult to achieve
such a growth trajectory without mobilizing domestic
savings, the Gok hasinitiated a series of measures under
GTP I with a view to raising the rate of private investment
in GDP from around 17 percent 2013/14 to more than 20
percent in the coming years.
World Bank Global Economic Prospects, June 2017
Sesame
Wheat
New York "C"
Niaeria FOB La...
India CIF Eur...
Sudan CIF Eu...
CME - WAP
CME -WAP
} a
Sep ton
Sed
Sep
Dec
1116.00
2400.00
143.81
206.35 ysdion
uuu
py.
/ A,
Ly Ethiopian Commodit change (ECX) tradindloor
External trade performance
Ethiopia largely exports agricultural products, coffee,
pulses and spices, flower, and fruits and vegetables, while
the share of manufacturing goods - including textile and
garments as well as leather products has increasingly
become an important part of its export profile. The country
is also diversifying its export trade portfolio with rising
contribution of mining products such as gold; as well as
new additions such as electricity, whose contribution is
expected to grow significantly in the next few years and
is facilitated by massive investment in national production
capacity and cross-country network grids.
On the other hand, Ethiopia primarily imports fuel oil and
manufactured goods from abroad. While both exports and
imports of goods and services have increased substantially
during the last five years, the less than $3.2 billion worth
of exports recorded each year between 2011-2015 falls
significantly short of the $5-8 billion targets set under
GTP land Il.
Ethiopia gross national savings (percent of GDP)
27.50
22.50
17.50
MN
NYNACS
12.50
7.50
2.50
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
Figure 1: Source IMF Global Economic Outlook
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
The Operating Environment
Massive and continued
infrastructure projects
in roads, railways,
power generation make
Ethiopia a favourable
destination for
investment.
Stability
and investment in
security
Massive
force
infrastructure
Ethiopia ranks as one
of the top performing
African countries in
government stability
and security
With appx100 million
population Ethiopia
is the second most
populous country in
the continent with a
median age of under
20
Large work
The Ethiopian constitution,
the supreme law of the land
provides strict protection
to private property. The
countrys investment laws
provide similar protections
and guarantees.
Business and
investment
friendly
environment
Export
Competitiveness
Operating
Cost: Competitive labour,
power etc
Market: AGOA, EBA &
Bilateral trade preferences.
Incentives: Very attractive
export incentives
1.1 Opportunities for Investment
Various opportunities for investment exist in many large and rapidly growing sectors that include government priority
areas such as manufacturing (textile and apparel, agro-processing, leather and leather related products, pharmaceuticals,
light machineries manufacturing), basic and import substitution (steel, equipment, chemical and pharmaceuticals),
strategic sectors (energy, ICT and bio-technology) as well as agriculture and service sectors.
Manufacturing
Ethiopia provides ample opportunities in the manufacturing
sector, which is also a key aspect of Ethiopia's second five
year Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II}. The plan aims
to bring significant growth of the manufacturing industry
so that it plays leading role in job creation, structural shift
in Ethiopia's export and address trade imbalance. In order
to achieve the above goals and accelerate growth and
expansion of the industrial sector a number of implementation
strategies are devised. These strategies mainly focus on
the implementation of project and programs which are
gear towards attracting quality investment, enhancing
production and productivity, boosting export shares,
accelerating technological learning and strengthening
the linkages among industries.
In addition to the strategic focus it receives from the
government, the manufacturing sector's comparative
competitive edge is driven by the availability of large
workforce, increasing productivity, strategic geographic
location, opportunities availed in creating backward
and forward linkages, preferential access to key global
markets including the US, EU, Japan, China, India and
other developed and developing countries, as well as the
government's strong commitment and sense of direction
to enhance the role and contribution of foreign investment
in the countrys industrial development strategy.
o Ethiopia offers a remarkable competitive advantage
for manufacturing industries due to government
facilitation of efficiency-enhancing investment
solutions including:
* Industrial parks that are ready for plug and
play
* Large pool of trainable work force available at
competitive wages;
* Competitive energy rate on a global standard;
* Geographic proximity and preferential access
to key markets; and
* Abundance of high-quality industrial raw
materials;
 Priority areas for investment:
* Light manufacturing (textile and apparel,
leather, agro-industry, electronics )
* Basic and import substitution as well as
export (steel, equipment, chemical and
pharmaceutical)
* Strategic (energy, ICT and bio-technology)
Agro-processing
Overview of the sector
The agricultural sector has the lion's share in Ethiopia's
economy, with more than 80% of the population
working in agribusiness and related industries
and 46% of the national GDP stemming from the
agricultural sector. The agro-processing sector is also
Ethiopias leading contributor in terms of production
value-added and employment.
Hence the agro-processing industry can not only take
advantage of over 100 million populations domestic
market, its large size can also offer competitive
advantages in exporting to both the African as well
as the global market.
Government policies and strategies
Strategic priority of GoE for FDI attraction and export
promotion
Strategic government intervention to boost the sector
Export and employment rate sharply increasing
Development of special clusters for horticulture
development and integrated agro-industrial parks
as a key vehicle.
Comparative advantages
Abundantand high quality inputfor agro-processing
due to: large land size (8th largest country in Africa
and 27th in the world) and huge proportion of arable
land, diverse topography and agro-climatic zones
and water availability for irrigation.
Ethiopia is home to some of the world's best specialty
coffee varieties such as Harrar, Sidama, Yirgacheffe
and Limmu.
Ethiopia has one of the fastest growing floriculture
sector. Itis now the second largest flower exporting
country in Africa and the fourth in the world.
The European and Middle Eastern fruitand vegetable
markets offer significant export opportunities for
Ethiopia.
Major brands in investing in Ethiopia
Africa Juice Tibila S. C: A Dutch company that employs more
africa] UICE
than 2,000 people to process passion fruit for export, and
produce fruitand vegetables for the domestic market.
Textile and apparel
Ethiopia's textile and apparel industry witnessing rapid
growth, as a number of domestic and multinational
firms are being engaged in productions of textile
and apparel for domestic and global markets. In
the path to industrialize Ethiopia, the sector is given
prominent position in boosting export, creating job
opportunities, and as a model to other sectors as well.
Due to focused strategy and support of the government,
in recent years, Ethiopia has grown spectacularly as
a sourcing destination for apparel attracting most
of the FDI in the sector.
Global brands from H&M and Calvin Klein, to Lee,
Wrangler and Timberland have already invested and/
or started sourcing operations in Ethiopia.
The Ethiopian Government has putin place ambitious
objectives for the sector within the five-year phase
of GTP II.
Plan 2020: generate US$ 1 billion export earnings
and over 300,000 employment opportunity.
Established the Ethiopian Textile Industry Development
Institute to enhance skills and technologies in the
sector.
Potential areas of operation: ginning, integrated textile
mills, spinning, weaving and/or knitting, dyeing and
printing, garment factory (knitted/woven).
The Ethiopian textiles and apparel industry has an
international comparative advantage due to a large
supply of skilled labor, most competitive cost of
electricity and potential for backward and forward
linkages.
The sector has a massive potential to develop
backward linkages within Ethiopia's economy. Cotton
is the main input to the production of textile and
apparel and Ethiopia is endowed with massive fertile
land suitable for cotton production. Over 1 million
hectares of land is dedicated for cotton production.
The sector's standing is further augmented by the
large-scale development of industrial parks in many
parts of the country: See the following sections
featuring Ethiopia's industrial parks program.
Major brands investing in Ethiopia
PVH Corp: American
clothing giantand owner
of the big global fashion
brands such as Tommy
Hilfiger, Calvin Klein,
Speedo, IZOD, Van Heusen,
Arrow, Warner'sand Olga.
PVH Corp. plays a key role
in Ethiopia's textile and
apparel industry both as
investor and major buyer;
in particular within Hawassa
Industrial Park (HIP).
PVH
Kanoria Africa Textiles Plc:
24% K Q N ora Kanoria Africa, a subsidiary
of New Delhi, based Kanoria
Chmeicals and Industries,
has set up its state of the
art manufacturing plant
in Bishoftu, Ethiopia since
2015 to manufacture
denim with initial capacity
of more than 12 million
meters denim per annum.
yarrica
TEXTILES PLC
RETR
Leather and leather products
e The sector is the leading manufacturing sector for Ethiopia. In 2015, the leather sector contributed to e percent of
GDP, and generated more than 22,000 jobs
e Currently, Ethiopia exports, mainly finished leather followed by a growing shoe exports. Other leather items including
gloves, bags and small leather articles have large potential for an exponential growth.
o Further to this, the recent expansion in leather gloves production (work, sports and dress types) is proof of existing
capacity as well as the potential to export with a steady growth of volume and value.
o Positive sectoral growth trajectory: The sector has experienced more than 150 percent growth in export earnings
in the first 5 years: The sector's growing export trend is noticeable when comparing the total export earnings of
only USD 75.5 million in 2008/2009 to USD 132.95 million by the end of 2013/2014 (LID, 2014).
Government Priority: the sector is strategic sector for the Ethiopian economy: Export target (GTPIl) of USD 800 million
by 2020. Employment targets of 59,580 2020
e The Ethiopian Government's strategy and policies to help set up the leather sector as a globally competitive industry
and incentives provided to help it grow has resulted in visible increases both in production and exports.
o Since 2012, the government has discouraged exports of raw hides and skins to boost exports of value-added products.
o Large population of livestock mainly cattle, sheep and goats, offering a significantly wide base of local raw materials:
Ethiopia has cattle population of more than 53 million, and sheep and goat populations of 25.5 and 24.1 million,
respectively. These numbers put the country 9th from the world and 1st from Africa, providing a strong raw material
base for the leather industry.
o Untapped potential: only 50 percent hides and skins are being utilized currently. In addition, a large number of
slaughter houses are being established with the potential of boosting the supply of high quality skins reaching
the tanneries.
o Ethiopia has a potential for price competitive and quality supply of skins and hides: The Ethiopian highland
sheepskins have got worldwide reputation in terms of quality, thickness, flexibility, strength, compact structure
and clean inner surface
Following various government support, more than 75 domestic and foreign leather and leather products factories
have invested in Ethiopia.
SWEFcersin George shoe factory insiclg Bole Bladustrial Park
al i
Major global brands investing in Ethiopia
George shoe factory: Based in Taiwan, invested around USD 150 million. It has a daily production capacity of 16,000
shoes and employs more than 1000 workers. Major destinations for the shoes are USA and China.
Huajian: Chinese based company, set up a factory in Ethiopia in 2011 as part of a plan to invest US$2 billion over 10
years in developing manufacturing clusters focused on shoemaking for export. It currently employs more than 3200
workers and produces for brands such as Guess and Calvin Klein.
PECTIO 1 ZO
Pharmaceuticals
Ethiopia's pharmaceutical industry provides ample potential
for investment. Ethiopia has the second-largest population
in Africa (>100M, ~8.5 percent of Africa's population);
with growth of 2.3 percent per year is expected. Such
increase in population size will resultin an increase in the
number of individuals requiring pharmaceutical products.
With average economic growth of >10 percent per year,
increase in disposable income will influence spending on
pharmaceutical products.
eo Goal: to become a pharmaceutical manufacturing
hub in Africa
o First country in Africa to develop a national strategy
for pharmaceutical sector development
Pharmaceutical manufacturing is priority sector for
Government
Investor friendly policies focused on pharmaceuticals:
Strong investment policy focused on pharmaceuticals;
various fiscal and non-fiscal incentives, one-stop
government services, price preference in public
procurement
State-of-the art industrial park that specializes in
pharmaceutical manufacturing is being developed
in Addis Ababa
Kilinto Industrial Park
* Location: Addis Ababa (south-eastern part), 863
Km from Djibouti port
* Labor: In close proximity to Addis Ababa
Science and Technology University
Cluster: Specialized in Pharmaceuticals
Land area: 2.79 million m?
Serviced land with common infrastructure, such
as wastewater treatment plant and dedicated
power substation
Growing local market: Ethiopia's pharmaceutical
market expected to grow by 15 percent annually
and to reach $1 billion by 2020
Accessible local and regional market: Ethiopia has
potential to serve as exporthub
For the > $20 billion pharmaceutical market in Africa
Trainable workforce with competitive wages
More than 10 schools of pharmacy in Ethiopia
Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd:
Cadilaisa global player
in the pharmaceutical
& CADILA
 PHARMACEUTICALS
LIMITED
The Care Continues...
rc
1
FIA!
ABER
industry with significant
presence both in India,
and African market. In
2015 Cadila earned a
global revenue of more
than $1.4 billion. With
its headquarter in India
the company is a veteran
investor in the Ethiopian
pharma market since
2003.
Humanwell: Headquartered
in China and with global
revenue of more than
$1.1 billion (2015) the
company is a key player
both in the Chinese and
African pharma market.
In its recent investment
in Ethiopia the company
is investing over $100
million in state of the
artfacility in two phases.
Agriculture
Ethiopia's vast land, favorable climate, and water and
land resources combine to make itan incredible hub for
investment. Located in the Horn of Africa, Ethiopia is atthe
crossroads between Africa, the Middle Eastand Europe.
Within easy reach of the Horns major ports, Ethiopia is
close to its traditional markets for export products - the
Middle East and Europe. This geographical proximity
provides major exporters in the world unparalleled access
to the Ethiopian floricultural market.
Horticulture
o Ethiopia provides the ideal conditions for growing
a wide array of fruits, vegetables, flowers and spices
given the existence of diverse agro-climatic zones,
long growing seasons, and availability of water for
irrigation, including 122 billion cubic meters of surface
water and 2.6 billion cubic meters of ground water.
o Due to the strategic support provided by the
government the horticulture sector has shown
tremendous levels of growth in the past decade or so.
Today, horticulture is one of the top foreign revenue
earner for Ethiopia, for example generating US$
250 - 300 million in annually compared to US$28.5
million in 2004/2005.
o Large available workforce: The industry creates over
180 thousand jobs, out of which 85 percentare for
women - a section of the population that has been
historically under-employed.
e Abundantland availability: Total land area available
for horticulture is about 12,552 hectares, with only 11
percent of this land being developed for horticulture.
o International demand: Currently, over 130 international
investors are operating in Ethiopia's horticulture
sector, exporting to the Netherlands, Germany, Saudi
Arabia, Norway, Belgium, UAE, France, Japan Italy
and the United States, among others.
Investment Opportunities in Horticulture
Fruits and Vegetables
* Mango, banana, papaya, avocado, citrus, grape,
and pineapple are the most common tropical and
sub-tropical fruits cultivated.
 Pear and plum are emerging as temperate fruits.
eo The vegetables grown in Ethiopia include, among
others, green beans, snow peas, broccoli, okra,
tomatoes, green chili, potatoes, cabbages cauliflower,
eggplant, cucumber, pepper, onion, and asparagus.
o Much of the land available for growing fruits and
vegetables is suitable for organic certification.
Flowers
o Ethiopia is the 4th largest non-EU exporter to the
EU cut-flower market and the 2nd largest flower
exporter from Africa (after Kenya), exporting to the
Netherlands, France, Germany, Italy, Canada, Norway,
Sweden, UK, the Middle East, and other EU countries.
 By the end of fiscal year 2016/17 floriculture has
contributed to USD 212.56 million, or 80 percent
of the total foreign revenue earning of the sector.
o Roses are the most widely produced variety of flowers.
Other types of flowers currently in production include
gypsophilia, hypericum, limonium, chrysanthemum,
carnations, static and pot plants.
Herbs and Spices
o The major spices cultivated in Ethiopia are ginger,
hot pepper, fenugreek, turmeric, coriander, cummin,
cardamom, and black pepper.
eo Close to 122,700 hectares are being used for spice
farming, with spice production reaching 244,000
tonnes per year.
o Potential areas for the cultivation of spices are Amhara
and Oromiya regions; Southern Nations, Nationalities,
and Peoples Region; and Gambella regions.
* The total potential for low land spice farming is
estimated to be 200,000 hectares.
Heys.
Herburg Roses, a Dutch owned grower,
recognized back in 2006 the opportunity
to expand their business by relocating to
Ethiopia. At that time, floriculture was in the
very early stages of developmentin Ethiopia,
but the conditions for growing roses were
perfect, with year-round warmth and great
light, and a large and enthusiastic workforce.
Initially the business took on 18 hectares on
the prestigious Sher Project in Ethiopia, and
over the years has expanded to 40 hectares
with more planned for the future. Herburg
Roses has recently become Fairtrade certified
and is exporting 22 types of flowers to the
European market.
Investing in agribusiness
Agriculture remains the backbone of Ethiopia's economy,
and with farmers shifting from subsistence to commercial
farming, the sector now stands at a unique inflection
point. Promising investment opportunities are emerging,
Beef
Ethiopia's large stock of cattle, abundant feedlot resources,
and proximity to the Middle East and North Africa  one
of the largest food-importing regions  all make beefan
attractive commodity. Meat exports from Ethiopia are also
currently growing at 25-30 percent annually. An investment
of US$1-5 million in an early-stage, integrated feedlot and
abattoir has the potential to generate a return of 30-40
percent over five years.
Diary
The urbanization of Ethiopia's population is driving up
dairy consumption, which is presently far lower than thatin
comparable countries like Sudan and Kenya. Meanwhile,
long-life milk products have taken off in China and India
and have the opportunity to disrupt Ethiopia's market,
where powdered milk substitutes prevail. A $10 million
to $12 million investment in a greenfield ultra-high
temperature processing plant could yield an annual return
of 25-35 percent.
For more information on the potential of Ethiopia's agricultural
sector, visit the Agricultural Transformation Agency website at
ata. gov. et.
which the Agricultural Transformation Agency hopes to
develop further by connecting farmers with commercial
supply chains. Here, we present five commodities ripe
for near-term investment.
Tomato
Fruits and vegetables in general are a priority sector for the
Ethiopian government, which aims to increase production
by 47 percent in the next five years. Tomato processing
in particular represents a natural move in a market with
abundant produce and limited agro-processing capacity,
in which consumers increasingly demand conveniently
packaged goods. A greenfield investment of $1.5-4 million
could yield an annual return of 30-35 percent.
Poultry
Ethiopia has Africa's secondlargest population but
consumes only one-tenth of the chicken meat consumed
by its neighbor, Kenya. Rising incomes and changing
tastes, coupled with the government's prioritizing poultry
production for nutritional and environmental reasons,
mean that the market will not remain undertapped for
long. A $20 million investment in a vertically integrated,
large-scale poultry processing plant would yield 15-20
percent returns in five years time.
Tourism and Hospitality
Located in the Horn of Africa's rift valley region
and known worldwide for being the origin of
mankind and one of the oldest civilizations, as
the source of the mighty Nile River and endowed
with a long-aged heritage and uninterrupted
political independence, Ethiopia commands a
large and untapped potential for tourism and
hospitality business. In addition, Addis Ababa's
significance as the political capital of Africa brings
high representation of international and regional
organizations, including the seat of the African Union
and the United Nations Economic Commission for
Africa, and hence sharpens Ethiopia's potential for
business tourism.
o Ethiopia's excellent network of national
parks, UNESCO World Heritage Sites and
other tourist attractions attract hundreds of
thousands tourists every year.
* Avaried selection of exciting destinations
awaits the visitor to Ethiopia. National parks
include the scenic Simien and Bale Mountains,
with their wealth of endemic wildlife, while
historical sites range from the atmospheric
rock-hewn churches of Lalibela to the towering
stelae of Aksum and castles in Gondar. Other
highlights are the awe-inspiring Erta Ale
Volcano, the cultural mosaic of Konso and
South Omo, and bird-rich lakes strung along
the Rift Valley floor.
eo Allthe above present Ethiopia as a key source
of growth in tourism and hospitably markets in
the continent and therefore ample opportunitys
for investment in the sector
o Investment opportunities include, star-rated
hotels, lodges, restaurants and grade 1 tour
operations.
Electricity
Ethiopia is endowed with abundant renewable energy resources and has a potential to generate over 60,000
megawatts (MW) of electric power from hydroelectric, wind, solar and geothermal sources.
Ethiopia targets to increase power generation to 17,000 MW (from existing 4370MW) by 2020 and plans to increase
exports to neighboring countries.
The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam - the largest hydroelectric power dam in Africa set to generate additional
6,450 MW electricity.
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) and Genale Dawa projects are under development while 8 new
hydropower projects have been identified for private sector development
The sector is open for private sector investment, including FDI, in all power generation sources and is expected to
fund 75% of GTPIl targets and develop ~4,500 MW.
Energy is becoming an important source of export and foreign exchange earnings thanks to increased generation
and interconnection capacities. Total electrical energy exports are expected to rise to 1,000 MW in the next 2-3 year
GEOTHERMAL WIND POWER HYDRO POWER
GENERATION
Generating capacity: Generating capacity: Generating capacity:
5,000 MW 10,000 MW 45,000 MW
In accordance with its sustainable development goals Ethiopia has Energy policy that focuses on development
of renewable energy sources
o Priority to renewable energy development to follow climate resilient green economy strategy
o Increase renewable energy mix to improve security and reliability of energy supply and be a regional hub for
renewable energy
o Strengthening cross boarder energy trade
 Improving the energy efficiency of systems and operations
 Strengthening energy sector governance to build strong energy institutions
o Ensuring capacity building and technology transfer to strengthen energy sector financing
 Encouraging Public-Private Partnerships in energy generation
6,800 MW power generation plants to be
build over the GTP Il period to achieve
rer) Er New renewable energy power generation plant
development for the GTP Il period broken down into
GTP Il power generation targets, 2020 (in private and public sector share (MW)
MW)
9B USD
4,524 MW -
Currently operational Hydro -
power generation plants > Soler -
Hyd Geothermal ml
FEED Biomass HM
800 3BUSD
Power plants
that are
currently under 3034
construction
Private Public
Total New plants
Possible interconnection lines with
neighbouring countries
220kv
230kv
2330kv (submarine cable)
400kv
500kv
HVDC Link.
Substation at 230 KV and above
Substation with Generation Facility { Switchyard
at 230KV and above)
Town
AF/DC Station (Converter/Inverter)
CNN: Riders on the storm: Ethiopia bids to become wind
capital of Africa
By Kieron Monks, CNN
Updated 2:00 PM ET, Tue January 3, 2017
o Ethiopia signals massive expansion of renewable
energy
. Investments will see sector grow more than
1000% by 2020
Ethiopia was among the most daring signatories to the
Paris Agreement on climate change, committing to cut
carbon emissions by 64% by 2030. The government
has ploughed billions of dollars into hydropower
megaprojects such as the Grand Renaissance Dam
-- which will be the largest dam in Africa -- and the
freshly-inaugurated Gibe [Il Dam.
The next target is to become the wind power capital
of Africa.
Telecommunications
In the past decade, Ethiopia's telecommunications service
has shown an explosive growth in terms of area coverage
and number of subscribers. As of 2014, there were about
30 million telecom service subscribers across the country.
The number of mobile subscribers increased from 6.25
million in 2009/10 te 28.3 million in 2013/14. Similarly, the
percentage of rural population with access to telephone
services (within 5 km radius) increased from 62.1 percent
in 2009/10 to 96 percent in 2013/14.
Mobile telephone subscriptions have drastically increased
since 2014 to reach 57 million; Ethio-Telecom has targeted
to boost mobile network access to 113 million subscribers
during GTP-Il and broadband internet data subscription
is projected to grow to 39 million from the current 1.46
million subscribers. According to IT web's report, Ethio
Telecom is now Africa's largest mobile operatr with more
than 57 million mobile subscribers (by the end of 2017)the
company has surpassed the record held by MTN Nigeria
to become Africa's largest telecom operator in terms of
its mobile customer base.
Road
Ethiopia's road infrastructure has continued to witness
increased investment during the past five years. The Gok
dedicated over 5 percent of the countrys GDP to the
development of roads which makesit one of the highest
in the continent.
 Addis-Adama express way
Between 2009/10 and 2013/14 alone, the road network saw
a boost from 48,800 km to 60,466 km. In addition, under
the government's universal rural road access strategy, a
total of 39,070 Km all-weather roads were constructed -
connecting the smaller level local administrative towns
and cities. In general, road density increased from 44.5
km/1000 km2 to 90.5 km/1000 km2 in the same year. Thus,
the average time taken to reach the nearest all weather
roads has been reduced from 3.7 hours in 2009/10 to
1.8 hours by 2013/14.
Ethiopian National Railway Network (ENRN)
SOMALIA
INDIAN
UGANDA OCEAN
.
Railways
Railway infrastructure development was one of the priority development
preoccupations of the Gok under GTP | and continues to receive greater
investment under GTP Il. In doing so, the national strategy puts into plan a
network of railway development schemes stretching across all corners of the
country. The completion of Addis-Djibouti railway line is expect to slosh the
logiistics cost in the sector and improve the speed-to-market bringing more
opportunity for attractive & expanive investment.
Ethiopia-Djibouti railway line, one of the major railway projects set out under the Growth and
Transformation Plan, entered in to operation in October 2016.
m= Completed
mmm Under construction
mm Planned
In 2015, Ethiopia also put into
operation the Addis Ababa Light
Rail network - the first of its kind
in Ethiopia and Sub-Sahara Africa.
The project was implemented by
the Ethiopian Railways Cooperation
at the cost of USD 475 million and
the network has a total length of
31.6 kms and a capacity of moving
60,000 passengers per hour. The
Light Railway system connects the
industrial suburbs of Addis Ababa
to the city centers.
Air transport
The development of air transport services in Ethiopia
has been narrated as one of the major success stories
impacting the countrys overall development. Ethiopia
prides operating the pioneering airline of the African
continent, the Ethiopian Airlines, which was established in
1945. During the past seventy years Ethiopian Airlines has
become one of the continent's leading carriers, unrivalled
in Africa for efficiency and operational success, and turning
profits for almost all the years of its existence.
Ethiopian Airlines domestic and international routes have successively
expanded over the years - currently serving over 100 international and
20 domestic destinations operating the newest and youngest fleet
Parallel to its passenger transport, EAL's cargo service
has continued to grow and support Ethiopia's expanding
trade and investment interaction with the rest of the world.
Ethiopian Airlines has designed an ambitious strategic
plan to develop its cargo transportation capacity, including
a dedicated cargo terminal, at a cost of more than 100
million USD. This will increase its cargo handling capacity
by additional 600,000tn/year - doubling its current facility
of 300,000tn/year and hence reaching a total of 900,000tn/
year. With additional expansions in the pipeline, the cargo
terminal is expected to eventually handle 1.2 million tn/
year - becoming Africa's largest and one of the biggest
of its kind in the world.
1.3 Human Capacity Development
Ethiopia has shown significantimprovements in the overall Tertiary education graduates in Ethiopia 2014/2015
standings of primary, secondary and tertiary education
services in the past five years. Teachers education 45,566
TVET 125,738
Undergraduate 86,210
Post-graduate 8,021
Ethiopia has seen
an unprecedented 1994/95: 26% 2012/13: 95% Source: Ministry of Education
acceleration in eb8ds seded
access to primary
education ] e )  
)
fied
During the reporting period alone, the higher education
sector recorded rapid expansion with the development of 125,738
twelve additional public universities enhancing the national
enrolment capacity to over half a million students in 2012/13.
The academic and research portfolio of higher education
institutions has also seen fundamental reorientation to
meet the high demands of the agricultural and industrial
sectors for skilled labor in the upcoming years. Currently,
70 percent of university students are enrolled in science
and technology streams while the remaining 30 percent
are trained in social sciences and humanities.
The Gok has also put considerable efforts to expand
technical and vocational education and trainings (TVET). TVET
About450 TVET institutions have been established across
the country with a view to producing trained manpower Undergraduate
that could readily be employed in the countrys fledging
manufacturing sector.
Post-graduate
Teachers education
 Workers in Bole Lemi Industrial Park
02. FDI Trends
2.1 FDI Size and Growth
Ethiopia's impressive domestic and foreign direct investment
(FDI) performance in recent years started from very low track
record. From 2009 to 2013, Ethiopia recorded a positive
growth trend in domestic savings with tremendous boost
from 5.2% to 17.7% of GDP. However, the investment gap
remained wide. Similarly, FDI inflows to Ethiopia during
the five years preceding the start of GTP | showed very
limited increase (with the notable exception of year 2011),
accounting among the least share in Sub-Saharan Africa.
In 2012, the FDI inward stock as a percentage of GDP was
as low as 11.8%, which fared poorly against East Africa's
average of 18.8%.
Meanwhile, ambitious growth goals were set under GTP |
and ll which required significant investments. FDI, along
with other measures, was regarded as essential tool to
finance the national growth and development plans. The
result was a significant increase both in the volume/size
of FDI inflows as well as the number of projects initiated
and implemented.
In 2014, Ethiopia emerged as the 8th largest recipient
of FDI projects in Africa, up from 14th position in 2013.
FDI flows reached record highs in 2015/16 and 2016/17,
with respectively USD 3.3 and USD 4.2 billion, compared
to the USD 344 million annual average for 2005-2007
and accounting for more than 11.1% and 8.8% of Gross
Fixed Capital formation in 2014 and 2015 respectively.
In nominal terms, FDI inflows to Ethiopia more than
quadrupled, over the past five years.
Foreign direct investment inflow (in US$ millions) 2007 - 2017
2007/8 2008/9 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17
Total FDI 814.6 893.7 960.3 1,242.5 1,072.0 12316 1,467.0 22022 32687 41708
Manufacturing FDI 570.2 661.3 7682 101885 8362 98528 1261.60 1,893.80 2843.70 3712
Share of manufacturing FDI 0.7 0.74 0.8 0.82 0.78 0.8 0.86 0.86 0.87 0.89
Share of manufacturing FDI to total FDI inflow (in US$ millions) 2007/8 - 2016/7
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
1500
1000
500
0
2007/2008 2008/2009 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17
e===Total FDI Manufacturing FDI
Source National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE), Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC)
16000
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
Ethiopia FDI stock in millions of (US) dollars (1995-2016)
Year 1995 2013 2014 2015 2016
FDI stock 165 6455 8310 10503 13700
Source: UNCTAD: World Investment Report 2017
Average registered capital per project (million ETB)
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
EB Average registered per project
Source: UNCTAD, EIC, NBE
Figure: FDI inward stock (million USD)
1995 2013 2014 2015 2016
Domestic investment projects dominated in in terms of capital outlays (54
terms of the number of approved projects. percent) and employmentcreation
However, foreign-owned investment projects (55 percent)
contributed more to the national economy
The high level of economic
growth, the provision of better
infrastructure, the successive
growth of market sizes and the
government's openness for
FDI contributed to high profile
investors targeting Ethiopia
in the past few years. Hence,
in 2014-15, Ethiopia rose to
be included in the Top-10
investment destinations in Africa
- recording 100% change in FDI
flow. (The African Investment
Report, 2015) Ethiopia also
doubled its registered growth
in manufacturing projects, in
addition to parallel increases
in manufacturing value added
growth from 12 to 17 percent.
Investment projects in the
pre implementation phase
continuously increased for the
time in consideration except for
2014 which recorded a 46%
decrease from the year before.
The highestincrementis recorded
in 2016 (an approximately 86%
increase from earlier year) and
the lowest one is recorded in
2014 (a decline of 42% from
the previous year). The average
growth of the pre implementation
investment projects licensed
from the Ethiopian Investment
Commission (EIC from now on)
is termed to be 18% for the four
years taking five years data.
The number of new FDI projects
per year is on linear (slightly
decreasing) trend, so is number
of operational projects. While
a much broader analysis is
warranted to better understand
and explain this trend, at the
outset the above graph seen
together with continuous increase
in average registered capital
per project shows evidence
of the fact that the countrys
attracting more focused and
targeted investment.
UNITED NATIONS CON
WORLD
INVESTMENT AND THE DIGITAL ECONOMY
UNCTAD World Investment Report (2017)
According to UNCTAD Investment Report 2017  FDI
flows to Africa continued to decline in 2016. It stated
sluggish commodity prices have diminished economic
prospects in Sub-Saharan Africa and tempered investor
interest in the sub region.
However, according to the report, some diversified
producers of East Africa registered strong FDI in 2016,
with Ethiopia attracting more inflows than ever before. In
doing so Ethiopia stood out to become one of the largest
recipients of FDI in the continent posting strong and
record growth (up 46 per cent to $3 billion) and became
the second largest LDC host economy, up from the fifth
position in 2015. According to the report much of this
achievement is derived from investments in infrastructure
and manufacturing. The reportalso stated that, the largest
cross-border M&A sale of the year ($510 million) was also
recorded in Ethiopia, with Japan Tobacco acquiring a
local cigarette manufacturing facility.
According to the report Ethiopia attracted new FDI in
manufacturing, which could create opportunities for local
SMEs to link to global supply chains. Ethiopia is also
cited by the report as one of the top performers in its
efforts to diversify its economy and consequently its FDI
pool against extractive investment that hitherto African
and land locked economies are known for. According
to the report despite the persistent weight of natural
resources in FDI to LLDCs, diversification of inflows is
advancing, especially in economies that have recently
attracted sizeable FDI, such as Ethiopia. The report also
states although China was one of the major sources of
FDI, foreign investors from other economies have started
investing more in Ethiopia's agro-processing, hotels and
resorts, as well as in its manufacturing activities.
Similarly, even though the report outlines a slight decline
in FDI inflows to landlocked developing countries (LLDCs),
and these countries continue to play only a marginal role
inthe global FDI scene, Ethiopia stands out among these
groups of countries by continuing in its positive trajectory
for a fourth consecutive year.
Share in world
3.4%
Ethiopia
$3.2bn
+45.8%
Nigeria
$4.4 bn
+45.2%
Angola
$14.4bn
Flows, by range
y rang 11.2%
Above $3.0 bn
$2.0t0 $2.9 bn
$1.0 $1.9 bn
$0.5 to $0.9 bn
Below $0.5 bn
Ethiopia has seen a steady growth in FDI flows in the last several years
Tob 5 host and 2016 has been another record year for FDI flow into the country.
cob In doing so the country received high remarks for its achievements by
various international development agencies including The United Nations
Economy $ value Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).
of inflows 2016% UNCTAD Investment Report 2017 shows that Ethiopia has become an
change investment hotspot in Africa and while FDI flows to the rest of the continent
continued to decline, Ethiopia attracted more FDI than ever before in 2016.
With a record growth of 46 percent FDI flow, the country has become one
of the largest recipients of FDI in the continent and the second largest
LDC host economy.
2.2 Distribution by Sector
The contribution of the investment projects in terms of capital outlays and job creation differed across sectors
Manufacturing and service sectors stood out among the top recipients. In 2013-4, the manufacturing sector received
more than 70 percent of the total capital outlays, followed by services and agriculture.
Focusing on specific sectors, Ethiopia has been particularly successful in attracting greenfield FDI in: textile; food,
beverages, and tobacco; chemicals and pharmaceuticals; automotive OEM; and financial and business services.
Overall, manufacturing sectors accounted for 68% of total FDI stock since 1992.
2%
Electricity (Generation, Transmition and
Distribution)
Education
Health
Hotels (Including Resort Hotel, Motels and
Lodges) and Restaurants
Tour Operation, Transport and
communication
Real estate, Machinery and equipment
Rental and Consultancy Service
Constructing contracting Including water
well Drilling
Others
Source: EIC
Historically, FDI inflow to the agriculture sector has been
very limited. However, a combination of policy initiatives
laid the groundwork for investment take-off in commercial
agriculture. A strong package of fiscal and non-fiscal
incentives - including income tax holidays, duty free
imports of capital goods, unlimited repatriation of profits,
and long term leases are to account for such success in
the sector Most importantly, however, a well-coordinated
and streamlined land provision and management system
orchestrated between the Federal Government and
Regional States eased the hitherto cumbersome land
provision procedures which investors had to navigate.
One of the most notable trends in FDI's sectoral composition
in Ethiopia is the growth of investmentin horticulture and
floriculture. 10 years ago, Ethiopia was hardly known as
exporter of cut flowers. Within the last decade alone,
Ethiopia transformed itself from zero commercial production
of cut flowers to become the second largest exporter of
the product in Africa only after Kenya, and the sixth in the
world.. Ethiopia's supply to global flower market grew by
more than 292.1% in recent years to contribute to more
than 9% of the world market share.
The accelerated rate of investment registered in horticulture
and floriculture sectors is the coefficient of favorable
local conditions linked to apt climatic conditions and
improvements in road and air transport and logistics
infrastructure.
-
The diversity of agro-climatic conditions in the highlands
and lowlands make Ethiopia a suitable place for the
production of a wide range of flowering plants, making
cut flower production a fast-growing export business.
Ethiopia is endowed with 12 river basins, 18 natural lakes
(including the Rift Valley Lakes) and 3.7 million hectares of
irrigable land. About 80-90% of these resources are located
in the west and south-western regions of the country,
which ishome to 40% of the population. Temperatures are
conducive to floriculture with long hours of sunshine - in
many parts shining for more than 11 hours a day. Water
for irrigation is available in abundant quantities and the
well-drained soil in Ethiopia is suitable for growing diverse
horticultural products.
Ethiopia's industrial development vision aspires to make the
country the leading manufacturing hub of Africa by 2025.
The countrys economic transformation to industrialized
economy will generate massive employment opportunities,
increase the per-capita income of its citizens and accelerate
its strategic direction of achieving a middle-income status
by the year 2025.
Due to the extracrdinary attention accorded to the sector,
investment in the manufacturing sector has continuously
increased in the last five years.
The textile and garment industry received the larger share
of investment in the manufacturing sector. Ethiopia has
obtained a sizable portion of the overall FDI inflow to East
Africa mainly due to the conducive opportunities availed
in the sector. In less than ten years, Ethiopia is projected to
become one of the major textile and garment producers
and industry players in the world.
Te
 Works at Isabeli JEktory inside Hawassa Industrial Park
The growing investment in the textile and garment sectors
could also be accounted as a factor of key infrastructural
development interventions initiated by the government
in electricity, road, and most recently, industrial parks
development programs. What is more, the dedication
of over three million hectares of irrigable land, linked to
the prevalence of favorable climatic conditions for the
production of cotton, is expected to play a key role in the
countrys global competitiveness in textile production. To
this could be added that foreign market opportunities and
in particular, preferential access accorded to Ethiopia-based
exporters to the US and EU markets under the AGOA and
EBA schemes have encouraged investment in the sector.
Summary of top 10 licensed foreign manufacturing investment projects by sub-sector
2001-2017
250
mManufacature of Machinery
and Equipment n. e. c
EManufacature of Furniture,
Manufacaturing n. e. c
mManufacature of Electrical
Machinery and Apparatus n. e. c
mManufacature of Wearing
Apparel, except fur apparel
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Manufacature of fabricated
Metal Products, Except
Machinery and Equipment
Manufacature of Textiles
= Manufacature of Other
Non-Metallic Mineral Products
= Manufacature of Chemicals
and Chemical Products
Manufacature of Rubber and
Plastics Products
Manufacature of Food
Products and Beverages
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Service
The GDP share of the service sector in the national
economy - including both distributive and other services
- has increased substantially due to both domestic and
foreign investment. Growth registered in trade, hotel and
entertainment, electricity, financial intermediation and
educational services are a few of the sub sectors that
contributed to the overall growth of the service sector.
The service sector has successively grown at a much faster
rate than both agriculture and industry.
Huajian:
One of the largest shoe producers and exporters in
China - Huajian - set up a factory in Ethiopia in 2011,
as part of its plan to invest US$2 billion over 10 years in
developing manufacturing clustersfocused on shoemaking
for export. The company produces shoes for brands such
as Guess and Calvin Klein, and hopes to see its exports
from Ethiopia reach US$4 billion within ten years. Source:
Deloitte, Ethiopia, a Growth Miracle, 2014; Centre for
Economic Policy Research, PEDL Research Note: The
Role of Foreign Investment in Ethiopia's Leather Value
Chain, 2013
Investment in the brewery industry:
Once an industry solely operated by state-owned
enterprises, the Ethiopian brewery industry has just
been fully transformed in the past five years. Today, the
sector attracts a number of domestic and foreign private
operators, including Diageo, Heineken, Habesha and Raya,
and is set to see even more entrants in the years ahead.
Heineken bought Harar Brewery for US $78 million and
Bedele Brewery for US $85 million - while Diageo bought
Meta Brewery for US $225 million, resulting in a combined
sum of US $388 million for the three breweries.
Africa Juice:
With global demand for tropical juices on the rise, in 2009,
africaJUICE Tibila Share Company, a joint venture between
Africa JUICE BV of the Netherlands and the Ethiopian
government, took operational control of the Tibila Farm
in Ethiopia's Upper Awash Valley and started producing
passion fruit, mangoes, papayas and other tropical fruits.
In addition to rehabilitating and expanding the newly
acquired farm, africaJUICE built a new fruit-processing
facility with state-of-the-art processing, sterilization and
packaging equipment. The processed juice is exported
through the port of Djibouti to markets in Europe and
the Middle East. The company directly employs 2,400
people. Source: VC4Africa; MIGA, Tropical Fruit Juice
Project Helping to Spur Economic Revival in Ethiopia,
April 18,2011.
Ayka Addis:
Ayka Addis, the Ethiopian subsidiary of the Turkish textile
giant - Ayka Textile, inaugurated in 20710 its factory ata cost
of US$140 million at Alemgena, 20km west of Addis Ababa,
creating jobs for more than 10,000 people. Ayka Addis
has the capacity to export textile products worth US$100
million a year. Source: All Africa, Ethiopia: 50 Turkish
Textile Factories to Relocate in Ethiopia, 2 August 2013
Castel Winery PLC:
Castel Winery brought in to picture the second winery
production line in the country with investment in the town
of Ziway, Oromia Regional State, located 163 kilometers
south of the capital Addis Ababa. Castel is the third largest
wine producer in the world and the second largest beer and
soft drinks business in Africa. Castel Winery PLC invested
around 540 million Birr and generated employment for
more than 800 permanent and casual workers. The first
wine bottling commenced in January 2014 and sales of
its first batch of products started to hit markets in the
aftermath of its inauguration on March 22, 2014. Castel
Winery PLC produces standard wines (Acacia brand) and
premium wines (Rift valley and Cuvee prestige brands),
targeting both local and foreign markets.
Employment
Foreign investment projects in Ethiopia created a total
of 586,842 jobs between 1992 and 2016, representing
a significant portion of the entire jobs created during this
period. Between August 1992 and August 2016, Ethiopia
attracted over 5000 realized FDI projects in multiple sectors,
creating over 282 thousand permanent jobs (Ethiopia
Investment Commission (EIC)'s statistics). In comparison,
domestic and public projects generated an average of
389,876 and 4,812 jobs respectively.
On average each foreign project generated 235 jobs, 113
permanent positionsand 121 temporary jobs on average.
Overall, manufacturing sectors accounted for 41% of
total permanent jobs created by FDI projects since 1992.
Ethiopia's sustained growth brought down measured
unemployment from its peak of 26.4 percent in 1999
to an average of 20.2 percent between 1999 and 2013,
and to a record low of 17.4 percentin 2014 (IMF 2015).
The textile and apparel industry takes the lion's share
in employment creation largely due to the increased
attractiveness of the country to the sector and the labor
intensive characteristic of the industry itself.
Average permanent and temporary jobs per project (2010-2016)
350
300
200 AA
150 >
100
=
source: (EIC)
== Average =e Average
permenent job temporary job
project project
HAWASSA INDUSTRIAL
Wt
03. Insight in to Ethiopia's Industrial
Parks Development Program
H. E Ato Hailemariam Desalegn, Former Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia at the Inauguration of Hawassa Industrial Park, Hawassa, 13 July 2016
3.1 Background: Industrial Parks (IP) Program
Ethiopia is taking a range of policy and strategic measures
to facilitate the move towards industrial development. To
this end, the country has putin place an industrial park
development program. This is apart from the national
endeavors to attract investment through the employ of
the ordinary investment regime. The IPs program has
been integrated to Ethiopia's development vision under
the Growth and Transformation Plan 11 (2015/16-2019/20)
and considered as important contributor to Ethiopia's goal
of becoming a middle income country by 2025. Ethiopia
sees industrial parks investment in strategic locations and
sectors as generator of more jobs, accelerator of increased
and diversified exports, earner of foreign currency, means
for greater transfer of technology and stimulator of socially
and environmentally responsible urban development.
Ethiopia enjoys favorable conditions to meet these
aggressive goals - especially in the light manufacturing
sector. The country has one of the most competitively
priced cost structures in the African Continent with regard
to electricity, labor and overall operational environment
and production costs.
Within the above framework the Government's growth
strategy emphasizes the development of Industrial Parks (IPs)
as an important tool to support economic diversification,
attract investment and increase exports. The IPs scheme
is especially relevant in the light manufacturing sector to
create employment, initiate export led growth, encourage
private investment attractions and stimulate benefits from
integration with the local economy. IPs are projected to
be equipped with a streamlined business environment,
common services and amenities, high-quality infrastructure
and readily serviced industrial land. All such arrangements
have been made available to local and foreign companies
through a single, efficient and streamlined IP administration.
The plan for the expansion of existing facilities and
development of additional IPs is buoyed by results of a
speedy delivery of IPs as well as risk uptakes by the public
developer arm of the government, the IPDC.
a Strvices Gen | Park
Furthermore, the Ethiopian model of IPs development
features generally recognized sound practices within a
competitive environment, combined with localized legal
and operational practices to capture understanding and
ease in implementation.
Salient benefits of the IPs program:
[} Sustainability (environmental & social)
o Rapid and massive job creation; with tailored skills
development
. Penetration into and expansion of external markets;
oe Technology transfer;
o Linkages of IP production to local business leading
to vertical integration
. Introduction of a business friendly environment;
including One-Stop-Services /OSS
Of key importance in the context of this process is the
institution of a streamlined, competitive and enabling
environment for private investors through the establishment
of the principle of separation of IP development and
regulatory functions.
Introducing the strong features to the IP programs would
eventually serve as a test lab to introduce reforms to the
national territory following the Asian SEZ model. The
fact that Ethiopia's IP development strategy has been
predicated on the experiences of and collaboration
with fairly developed Asian economies ensures a bright
prospect both to IP developers and individual tenants -
especially in the light manufacturing sector.
In laying out its IP development strategy, GoE's focus
has also included programs to ensure IP investors are
able to quickly integrate into the local economy, provide
opportunities to local business to enjoy linkages with
different IPs as business driven initiative and to make
IPs investment more sustainable by stimulating higher
value strategies to IP production. The latter component is
particularly dictated by international experience; itwould
be very difficult to pursue its implementation at a later
stage if ithas not been duly considered at the beginning
of IP developmentinitiatives. Normally viewed as one of
the key reasons why linkages programs for IPs are initiated,
it suffices to note thatonly a few linkages programs have
been successful around the world. In this tune, the EIC
has further emphasized working on complementary
themes such as technology transfer, labor training and
overall social benefits.
Indoing so Ethiopia is building competitive conditions
required for a successful IPs development, growth and
expansions within an Ethiopian social, legal and operational
environment.
Development
Ethiopia currently has five completed industrial parks: Four
publicly owned (Bole Lemi Industrial Park, Hawassa Indusrrial
Park, Mekelle Industrla Park and Kombolcha Industria Park)
and one private (Eastern Industial Park). From the five Bole
Lemi IP and Hawassa IP are operational while Eastern IP (a
private IP) is also operational. Mekelle IP & Kombolcha IP
are already half full waiting for investors for the remaining
space. The government has put in place concrete plans to
develop additional IPs during the period of 2016-2017.
An important development that demonstrates the level
of market interest in Ethiopia's IP program is that seven
additional IPs are already approved and currently under
various phases of development. The development of five
(5) private industries is also underway during the same
period. These are Huajan, George Shoe, Vogue, CCECC
and CCC Industrial parks.
In addition a key aspect of the of Ethiopia's industrial
parks program is the fact that the sector has been open
for foreign investment and various government support
measures has been putin to place. Currently seven private
industrial parks are under different levels of development
and/or undergoing expansion.
PUBLIC-INDUSTRIAL PARKS
SPECIALIZATION: TEXTILE AND APPAREL, .
ETHER AND LEATHER PRODUCTS SPECIALIZATION: TEXTILE AND APPAREL i
SPECIALIZATION: TEXTILE AND APPAREL, SPECIALIZATION: TEXTILE AND APPAREL, LEATHER
AND LEATHER PRODUCTS
DEBRE BIRHAN IP
SPECIALIZATION: AGRO PROCESSING
BAHIR DAR IP KILINTO IP
SPECIALIZATION: PHARMACEUTICAL
EASTERN INDUSTRIAL PARK
LOCATED IN DUKEM
400 HA (TOTAL SIZE), 267
(PHASE)
OPERATIONAL - UNDER EXPANSION
PRIVATE INDUSTRIAL PARKS
GEORGE SHOE INDUSTRIAL
PARK
LOCATED IN MODJO
100 HA
LEATHER AND LEATHER PRODUCTS
HUAJIAN INDUSTRIAL PARK
LOCATED IN LEBU (SOUTH
WESTERN OUTSKIRTS OF ADDIS
ABABA)
184 HA
LEATHER AND OTHERS
VOGUE INDUSTRIAL PARK
LOCATED IN MEKELLE
TEXTILE & APPAREL
CCECC ARERTI INDUSTRIAL
LOCATED IN ARERTI
100 HA (PHASE 1
BUILDING MATERIALS AND
FURNITURE
CCECC DIRE INDUSTRIAL PARK
LOCATED IN DIRE DAWA
1000 HA
MIXED WITH EXPORT FOCUS
3.3 IP Regulatory
Framework
As international experience reveals, top industrial park
jurisdictions owe their successes inter alias to a properly
developed industrial parks legal regime while the failures
of industrial park programs in many countries have been
partly attributed to poorly-designed legal frameworks.
Ethiopia has taken lessons from foreign experiences
and has embarked on carving out specially designed
normative and institutional frameworks well beyond the
ordinary arrangements . The frameworks putin place are
comprehensive, transparent and predicable and would
help remove investment constraints and challenges
emanating from the country's traditional commercial and
investment regimes.
The enactment of the Industrial Parks Proclamation in
2015 has been a milestone in this direction. A primary
legislation for the sector, itis augmented by investment
laws and regulations which define and bolster the
powers of lead industrial park regulatory institutions - the
Ethiopian Investment Board and the Ethiopian Investment
Commission. These laws serve as solid legal foundations
for the nations industrial parks program.
The statutes envisage key legal and institutional elements
which are recognized as industrial park investment
enablers, namely:
o Industrial park designation criteria;
 Private sector, private-public partnership or government
investment in industrial parks;
o Rights and obligations of industrial park developers,
operators, enterprises, workers and residents;
Industrial park investor protections and guarantees
including national treatment, protection of property rights
and special foreign exchange schemes;
o Regulatory processes and procedures including
streamlined enterprise registration and licensing
rules, business facilitative customs procedures, and
simplified visa, residency and work permits;
 Factory sheds at Hawassa Industrial Park
o Industrial park customs-controlled area elevating
the status of industrial parks as extraterritorial from
customs and fiscal stand points;
o Industrial park labor affairs and building norms;
 Special income tax, customs and other incentives
with IPs;
o Provisions on mitigating the risk of land speculation;
o Lead-institutions to administer industrial park programs
on strategic and day-to-day levels;
o Environmental and social impact mitigation plans;
o Investment dispute resolution and compliant handling
procedures;
e One-stop-shop to deliver regulatory and related
services;
* Special business exit strategies in the event of
bankruptcy/liquidation, merger or acquisition, and
o Declaration on primacy of the industrial park legal
framework in case of conflict of laws vis-a-vis other
laws.
The Industrial Parks Proclamation addresses these major
legal ingredients only generally so as to give room for
regulatory flexibility without sacrificing legal predictability.
The details regarding issues from industrial park designation
to business exit strategies are worked out under a
secondary law (courtesy of Ministers Regulation) and
tertiary legislation (Ethiopia Investment Board Directives).
In doing so the highlights of the past year has been the
successful development and adoption of the Industrial Parks
legal instruments both the IP Regulation and IP Directive.
The process of developing the industrial parks legal and
institutional arrangements has been informed by a series
of consultations held with industrial park investors, public
sector institutions and professionals; this was indispensable
given the novelty and complexity of the legal regime (as
it touches upon the mandates of many levels of public
institutions) and to raise awareness about the purposes
and contents of the regime, and most importantly, to
enrich the documents through feedback received from
various stakeholders.
Of the three currently operating industrial parks,
the state-developed Bole-Lemi park is undergoing
expansion, while it has already created employment
for about 12,000 Ethiopians. Most importantly the
Hawassa Industrual Park (HIP) has entered in to
operation with a commendable participation of PVH
asthe anchor investor, further strengthening Ethiopia's
target of attracting leading light-manufacturing
investment especially in textile and apparel sub sector.
Developed by the IPDC, the HIP could be regarded a
case study in successful and agile developmentas the
infrastructure development venture was completed
in just nine months. The standards developed in HIP
are already directive the government's initiative in
developing the additional IPs in the coming year.
HIP is projected to create about 60,000 direct jobs
in two shifts when it reaches its peak.
Ethiopia's IP development program features
This extraordinary performance in IPs development
is the result of Ethiopia's carefully designed market
strategy to attract foreign direct investment from all
over the world both as park developers and enterprise
investors. Of the private sector IP developers so far
approved, six are from China and one from Taiwan
(China), India, Bangladesh respectively. The IPs
development experience and models from these
two countries will no doubt have a positive impact
on Ethiopia's IPs programs. China's experience with
Special Economic Zones (SEZs) was the precursor
of its massive economic development enterprise
providing business friendly reforms which were
later rolled-out to the national territory - outside of
the economic zones.
* Word class, ready to plug and play, dedicated to textile, apparel, footwear, leather & leather
products industries; pharmeceutical, agro-processing etc
* Specialized, vertically integrated and eco-sustainable;
 One-stop government services;
* Strategically located along the new national railway corridors;
o Broad-based government support;
. Favorable investment climate;
o Investment policy led by the Ethiopian Investment Board (EIB) - chaired by the Prime Minister.
Incentives Applicable to Industrial Parks: Manufacturers
 100% foreign ownership allowed;
o Exempted from income tax for 8 - 10 years; (subject to export)
o Exempted from duties and other taxes on imports of construction materials machinery, equipment,
accesories, spare parts, raw materials and limited vehicles;
. No export restrictions or taxes;
 One-stop- government services;
eo 60-80 years land lease at (promotional rate) for construction of factory shades and dormitories
inide Industrial Park premises;
Incentives Applicable to Industrial Parks: Developers
eo 60-80 years land lease at (promotional rate)
o Exempted from income tax (for) 10-15 years;
o Provision of necessary infrastructure, including dedicated power.
and limited vehicles;
) re we
77 p A
HAWASSA INDUSTRIAL PARK \
IE Sx hs ee SR. TA
7 Xe | 7
colbskuteinn es | TM
amcompuroll LE FR.
> IE Baio] fork
By
 Homgssa Industrial Park
Ee. BW eae
3.4 Hawassa Industrial Park - a flagship achievement
Hawassa Industrial Park (HIP) is located at the heart
of Hawassa, the capital city of the Southern Nations,
Nationalities and Peoples Regional State and a premium
holiday destination. Known for its hospitality, Hawassa
is home to a diverse group of nations, nationalities and
peoples. The beautiful lake of Hawassa provides grace
and cooling ambiance to the city. Hawassa has now
added to its profile a state-of-the-art and the countrys
flagship industrial park.
As the city is endowed with massive labor supply of up
to five million people within 50km radius - making it an
ideal investment destination for labor-intensive industries.
lt provides labour that is 20-25% lower in cost than Addis
Ababa with a low turnover of employees due to less
competition from other industries and sectors such as
construction.
THE PARK HAS AN ANTICIPATED EXPORT VALUE OF US S1BILLION
0]
COMPANIES IN THE PARKS
HIP
s Globally leading textile &
apparel companies occupying
70% of the park oo
Domestic industrialists
occupying 30% of the park B
INDUSTRIAL PARK FEATURES:
s Eco-industrial park with a zero-
liquid discharge (ZLD) facility
s Plug-and-play environment with
access to basic infrastructure
* Sector specialization
* 100% export processing
INDUSTRIAL PARK FACILITIES
* One Stop Service
* Accomodation
Shopping center
Health clinic, fire brigade & 24*7
security services
Phase 1 of HIP rests on a total land area of 1.4 million
square meters, of which 410,000 m2 is taken by factory
structures housing 52 factory shades, various other
auxiliary buildings and features more than 18.3 Km of
road, over 21.5 kms of electric line, 16 kms of telecom
lines and over 23.8 Kms of fresh water supply pipelines.
QUICK
FACTSON
2
LOCATION
 Southern Nations, Nationalities
and Peoples Regional State
* Located at the heart of the
capital city- Hawasa
, POPULATION &EMPLOYMENT
* 5 million people within
50km radius
* Employment of up to
60,000 workers in two shifts
INDUSTRIALPARK AREA
* Land area of 1.4 million
square meters (phase 1).
Total of 3 millions square
meters
s Factory shed built up
area 410,000 m2
The park includes excellent shared facilities such as
dormitories and commercial buildings covering a land
area of more than 26,600 m2 destined for the use of
shopping centers, health clinics and banking services.
The construction of the park was completed with a record
time of not more than 9 month and was inaugurated on July
2016 followed by production inauguration on June 2017.
3 SY
H. E Ato Hailemariam Desalegn, Former Prime Minister of the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia at the Grand Production
Inauguration of Hawassa Industrial Park, Hawassa, June 20, 2017
Distinguished CEOs and Board Members
Excellencies and dignitaries,
Invited Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Itis a great pleasure and honor to be here in Hawassa
with you as we celebrate the full operation of the Hawassa
Industrial Park.
Today's event paves the way to another exciting chapter
in Ethiopia's industrialization efforts.
As many of you know, a crucial component of Ethiopia's
drive for growth and transformation is the development
of a vibrant manufacturing and industrial base. Our vision
is to become the leading manufacturing hub in Africa by
2025. Our goal is to create millions of new jobs in labor-
intensive and export-oriented light manufacturing. The
full operation of the Hawassa Industrial Park is the most
evident and concrete example yet towards achieving our
national vision.
Hawassa will now and forever be a symbol of our national
enterprise, our bold move to industrialize our economy.
In Hawassa, we have been successful in building a world-class
industrial park featuring state-of-the-art, environmentally
friendly technology. But the key to Hawassa's success is
not the infrastructure and factory sheds per se. In fact, that
is the easiest part. It is rather our progress in translating
our vision into reality. It is our achievement in attracting
and hosting leading investors to establish manufacturing
operations. Most of these companies have now started
operations and export; and very soon Hawassa will be a
thriving industrial hub.
Our economy is also expanding ata robust pace and the
world is watching our transformation closely and with keen
interest. A few weeks ago, the World Bank forecasted that
this year Ethiopia will be the fastest growing economy in
the world. Similarly, IMF called Ethiopia the star performer
in the African continent this year.
Ethiopia has now become one of the largest recipients of
FDI in the African continent. Despite the decline in interest
in the rest of Africa, FDI flow in Ethiopia has increased by
46% this year. Arecent report by UNCTAD concluded that
Ethiopia is now the 2nd largest recipient of FDI in textile
and apparel, next to Vietnam.
Ethiopia is fast becoming an attractive destination for
investment. Our drive to create a competitive textile
and apparel sector is advancing in the right direction.
Indeed, Ethiopia is emerging as a leading manufacturing
hub in Africa.
The Hawassa Industrial Park is also significant because
it represents our blueprint in designing and developing
an integrated eco-industrial park across the country. We
have learned a lot in the process of the development of
this park, from design to construction and finally to park's
operation and management. The Hawassa Industrial Park
has given us lessons and experiences as a framework in
working procedures, strategies, speed of delivery, and
most importantly viability. Using and improving upon our
Hawassa Industrial park model we are in the process of
developing industrial parks across the country. By virtue
of being a model of sustainable and productivity for all
subsequent industrial parks, Hawassa Industrial Park has
created a conducive environment for the creation of jobs
for Ethiopian youths across the country.
This achievement is a direct result of the shared vision
among the government, PVH and other investors, as
well the government's unrelenting determination to stay
actively engaged and adjust to arising trends and situations
. Although our progress has not always been as smooth
as we want it to be, we have succeeded in developing
an industrial park that has addressed the fundamental
problems and constraints previously encountered.
Although the production inauguration of Hawassa Industrial
Park marks a milestone in our quest to industrialization,
we should note that our journey has begun. Now is not
the time to be resting on our laurels. We must keep this
hard-earned progress going. We must continue to build
on what we have done, and strive to climb higher.
And the question now is, how do we keep the progress
going? How do we build on it?
First, | want to underscore the government's firm belief
that foreign direct investment has a critical role for
manufacturing growth. lt makes significant contributions in
terms of investment, employment, and foreign exchange.
Targeted and high-quality investments will enable us to
expand the base of our economy and make it less likely that
we will be affected by a downturn in the global economy.
Additionally, it enables the diffusion of knowledge and
technology to domestic firms and workers. Without new
investment, there can be no strong economy. Without a
strong economy, we cannot sustain our growth and increase
the income of our people. This is why high-quality investors
and anchors like those we have in Hawassa are important
contributors to our growth efforts. They create a ripple
effect to the whole economy. The opening of this park will
provide a major boost to existing retail commerce, the
hospitality industry, and housing and real estate sectors.
Astrong manufacturing sector is therefore a vital ingredient
to our growing economy. While acknowledging the critical
role of foreign investment, we also need to emphasize the
vitality to drastically develop the strategic manufacturing
capabilities of domestic investors and ensure their viability.
Today, I'm calling for all of us-federal, regional, city, local
officials and domestic industrialists, universities and
our world-class investors--to come together, to spark
a renaissance of our manufacturing sector, to support
investments and to create new opportunities for cur youth
so that they can achieve an improved quality of life. Let's
all be genuine partners to growth!
Second, | believe our human capital will in the end drive
our industrial productivity. We need to understand
that what we do today will have a direct impact on the
competitiveness of our industry sector in the future. To
succeed in the manufacturing sector, we must have a
capable and productive workforce. We need our workers to
be skilled and disciplined. Industrial discipline is essential
for ensuring improved performance, better productivity
and an effective workforce. Our trade unions need to
work closely and in good faith with our investors to forge
sound industrial relations and to maintain industrial peace
atall times. We also need to establish strong partnerships
between universities and manufacturers where the flow of
information can be facilitated to bring about an increased
transfer of skills and technology.
Third, l am directing every single agency in our government
to work with a shared and urgent sense of mission, to
collaborate and create a vibrant plug and play business
environment in the industrial parks. We are now shifting to
a new way of doing business within the governmentan
approach that delivers vision and actions, and not just
ideas and promises. We need to cut bureaucratic red
tape that stalls good investments from breaking ground.
Our service delivery to the investors should match the
seriousness and the speed at which Ethiopia is pursuing
this drive.
Fourth, we must make a concerted effort to ensure our
manufacturing is globally competitive. We know, for
example, the textile and apparel sector is highly sensitive
to cost and lead times of import and export. If our trade
logistics is not efficient, our export will never be competitive
and our industries will fail. In this regard, we is making
steady progress. For instance, we are constructing a
cross-docking facility in Modjo to allow for efficient cargo
movement from rail to trucks and trucks to rail. We've
builtand made operational a modern, high speed railway
linking the country to the Djibouti Port. Still, we can and
have to do better. Going forward, we need to create a
competitive logistics industry that reduces transit time,
modernizes the sector, provides more services and meets
fully the users needs.
The availability of cost-competitive, renewable, and clean
energy is important for all our investors. Our utilities need
to provide adequate, reliable electricity, and to avoid
unreasonable power outages that could interfere with
Without modern banking and financial services, Ethiopia will
not be a competitive investment destination. Our banking
industry need to continuously improve and optimize their
services to provide tailored services to industrial parks to
make our exporters internationally competitive. Our banks
should offer diverse financial products and services. Our
financial institutions need to modernize to keep up with
global standards.
Finally, we need to create an ideal work-live-learn
environment in Hawassa that is conducive for visitors,
residents and investors to enjoy life and excel in their
work. When Hawassa is clean and green, that makes
it a great melting pot for talent, ideas, investment and
business opportunities. We must Hawassa attractive not
just because of our lake and climate but also because of
our facilities, security, connectivity and health standards.
When we address these issues and do more, | am confident
that we will take Hawassa to the next level of success
and achieve our national vision of making Ethiopia the
manufacturing hub of Africa.
Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen
On behalf of the Government of Ethiopia, | wish to
thank most sincerely everyone who has contributed to
this success. From the first design, to the planning and
construction, to attracting key anchor investors, a number
of you have been involved.
Allow me to name a few.
I want to thank first the Investor Group led by PVH Corp.
Your holistic approach, your focus on verticality and
sustainability, helped us build a state-of-the-art industrial
park. We know you have invested in Ethiopia because
you have confidence in our country and our ability to
deliver what we promise. We thank you for the trust and
partnership. Your confidence is our competitive asset. |
assure you we will not only retain it but we will improve
on it. We encourage you to maintain you interest and
expand your investment.
I would also like to thank the Chinese Civil Engineering
Construction Corporation (CCECC). CCECC contracted
to build the park to the highest standards taking into
account relevant environmental and social standards and
by all measures has achieved this feat.
| would also like to thank three of our development
partners. The Government of the Peoples Republic of
China for its support and partnership in our infrastructure
and industrial parks development program. DFID for
providing us with strong support for our worker skills
training program by setting up sourcing and grading
centers and the [FC/WB team for providing us valuable
technical assistance in attracting and promoting investment
in Hawassa Industrial Park.
Finally, | would like to thank the government team. | would
like to thank our lead agencies: Ministry of Industry, EIC,
and IPDC for working seamlessly together to deliver
this project. Moreover, many government agencies are
involved in providing the one stop shop services (OSS).
wantin particularly to thank the Ethiopian Revenue and
Customs Authority (ERCA), Immigration and Nationality
Affairs Agency, the Commercial Bank of Ethiopia and
Ethiopian airlines, the federal and regional security forces
for their all-rounded contribution.
May we continue to dream bold dreams and build on
our success!
Thank you!
H. E Dr. Arkebe Oqubay,
Minister, Head of Economic
Sectors Delivery and Support,
Office of the Prime Minister,
and Board Chairman of
Industrial Parks Development
Corporation (IPDC) at the
Grand Production Inauguration
of the Hawassa Industrial Park,
Hawassa, June 20, 2017
Your Excellency Ato Hailemariam Desalegn- Prime
Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia;
Your Excellency Ato Desse Dalge - President of the
Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples National
Regional State;
Distinguished Investors of Hawassa Industrial Park;
Distinguished Ambassadors and Dignitaries;
Distinguished Government Officials;
Invited Guests;
Ladies and Gentlemen;
| would like to start by first congratulating all of you here
today as we celebrate the grand production inauguration
of the Hawassa Industrial Park. Congratulations on this
important achievement!
This impressive national accomplishment - attained
through the unrelenting hard work of key stakeholders - is
a clear demonstration of the soundness of our national
development policies and economic transformation
strategies that place particular emphasis on the expansion
of the manufacturing industry and the full realization of
our export potential. The manufacturing sector plays a
critical role in increasing our exports and foreign currency
earnings, generating employment opportunities, and
creating knowledge and technology spillovers. Without
strong manufacturing base, we cannot build a strong and
diversified national economy thats predicated on robust
interlinkages between the industry and agriculture sectors.
With the aim of realizing Vision 2025 and becoming
the leading manufacturing hub in Africa, we have made
an extensive and targeted effort to attract and retain
quality investors with sound capital and finance, strong
technological spillover and export growth contribution
potential. As a direct result of our efforts, 18 leading global
manufacturers have invested in Hawassa Industrial Park
(HIP) using their own capital and finance. Their investments
are consistent with our strategy of developing a globally
competitive, sustainable and vertically-integrated apparel
and textile industry.
To promote meaningful participation of local investors
in our industrial park development program, we have
formulated a clear linkage strategy. Domestic investors
face significant challenges as it relates to access to finance,
skills, technology, and market. To address access to finance
constraints, the government has facilitated credit for
working and investment capital up to 85% of their needs.
In response to the other challenges, our government has
prioritized the interest of domestic companies and has
created opportunities for local investors to enter sourcing
network and better exploit supply linkages opportunities.
The government has also outlined a cost sharing scheme
for up to b years for employee training and recruitment of
expatriate managerial staff. In line with this scheme, the
government will cover 85% of the training cost in the first
year, 75% in the second year, 50% in the third year, and
25% of the total cost in the fourth year.
Over the past several months, we have overcome numerous
odds and endured several challenges in laying the
groundwork to transition manufacturers to the production
and export phases. Power, water, telecom and related
infrastructure were put in place within the Park to lower
entry and operational costs for manufacturing enterprises.
We installed park operation and management structures,
and service systems which would enable enterprises to
efficiently enter into full operations. The procurement,
transportation and setting up of production equipment
were successfully undertaken by manufacturing enterprises.
Government services in the past provided by different
institutions in an uncoordinated approach have been
rationalized and streamlined to improve the park's business
climate- with the Ethiopian Investment Commission,
Commercial Bank of Ethiopia, Main Department for
Immigration and Nationality Affairs, the Ministry of
Labour and Social Affairs, the Ethiopian Revenue and
Customs Authority and other key agencies all setting
up an organized, efficient and comprehensive one stop
service offerings at the park.
To assure a seamless and adequate supply of skilled labour
force, we have been able to organize a model system
for sourcing, recruitment and training of employees.
Preparations have also been completed to establish
an academy within the industry park that, on a regular
basis, caters for the training requirements of employees
and enterprises in relation to labour ethics, skills, and
supervisory competences. We have also signed cooperation
agreements with the globally renowned Kunshan Industrial
Park for the effective operation and management of the
industrial park, and with Arvind Envisol for the operation
of the Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD) facility.
We recognize that the Parks full operation cannot be
accomplished without pursuing a corresponding initiative
that tackles the critical issue of shortage of affordable
housing for park employees. In this regard, we have been
able to introduce an innovative approach in collaboration
with the Sidama Micro-Finance Enterprise. Hawassa
residents were granted preferential access to loans - to
finance the construction of additional housing units within
their premises for rentals to park employees - a scheme
which we believe will contribute in augmenting their
income and in boosting the city's economic standing. In
our search for lasting solutions on housing, we have now
commissioned a comprehensive study which is expected
to explore all options and propose viable solutions.
In realizing our vision of industrial development and
economic transformation, we pursued our industrial parks
development program - guided by the best global practices
and lessons. First, all our industry parks were designed
and constructed in strict compliance with environmental
safety and protection standards as eco-friendly and green
industrial parks. We are proud to announce a water and
waste treatment plant within the HIP, which is based on
the latest Zero Liquid Discharge technology for treating
and recycling about 90% of the water used in the park.
This technology is the first of its kind in Africa. This way,
we will be able to ensure that no pollutant matter or waste
is released into the Hawassa ecosystem.
Secondly, in building our parks, we adopted the key
principle of specialization to respond more readily to the
specialized needs of industry clusters. This has allowed us
to attract high-quality investments in specific sectors that
can contribute to export growth and create a condition
for knowledge transfer and learning.
We have now been able to successfully complete the
construction of the next line of industrial parks scheduled
for the current fiscal year.
Excellency Prime Minister;
Currently, close to 15 industrial parks, including Bole
Lemi | and Hawassa Industrial Park, are at various stages
of development. The Mekelle and Kombolcha Industrial
Parks will be fully completed and inaugurated by the
end of this month. This September, we will witness the
inauguration of the Adama and Dire Dawa Industrial Parks.
The Ethiopian Investment Board (EIB) recently approved
a Pharmaceutical Industry Incentives Packages and
Institutional Framework for New Productive Capacity,
Hubs Development and Exports for Ethiopia. To allow
for the full implementation of this strategy, a new and
specialized Pharmaceutical Hub will be completed and
inaugurated in Klinto in January 2018. Bole Lemi-Il will
also be completed around the same time.
Additionally, Jimma and Bahir Dar Industrial Parks are
scheduled to be completed in April and May 2018
respectively, while Arerti and Debre Birhan Industrial Parks
will be ready to hostinvestors by June 2018. Relatedly, we
have completed our preparation to start the construction
of Alagie, Aysha and Hunan-Adama Industrial Parks next
year. We will also begin next year the preparation of the
feasibility study for the Semera Industrial Park.
| also want to emphasize that despite the progress we
have made so far, it is important to recognize that we
have significant work ahead of us. Much more remains
to be done.
Above all, we will provide comprehensive and continued
support to ensure all the enterprises in Hawassa Industrial
Park operate at full capacity, generate close to 60,000 jobs
and reach USD 1 billion export target in the next 18-24
months. We need to improve our capacity to ensure all
park operation, administration and One Stop Services are
provided in an efficient, streamlined, coordinated and
expedient manner. To drive our industrial productivity
and maintain disciplined workforce, we need to carefully
develop and properly implement an effective employee
training program that will respond to and put atthe center
the needs of the manufacturing enterprises. This is vital
to the long-term success of all our enterprises.
In addition, we have to make a coordinated effort to attract,
facilitate and retain quality investments in Hawassa and
all other pipeline industrial parks. Building on our current
strengths and the presence of leading investors, we have
to work hard to develop our domestic manufacturing
capabilities and harness linkage opportunities to increase
the sustainability of investment overtime.
It is also incumbent upon us to ensure all the parks in
the pipeline are developed and operationalized as eco-
friendly, green industrial parks, respecting our obligation
to protect the environment.
Along the way, we have gained more experience. Our
development journey has provided us with invaluable
lessons about effective approaches of designing and
developing integrated eco-industrial parks. We are also
developing a dynamic and adaptive policy capability that
will set clear goals, concretize implementation plans and
inform action.
Finally, while acknowledging our limitations, | want to
assure all our investors the government's highest political
commitment in providing full support and adhering to
policies that foster growth. Our government will back
you all the way.
In closing, | want to express my gratitude to several
institutions and individuals who contributed immensely
to the success of our endeavour.
[} First, | would like to thank all our investors in Hawassa
Industrial Park. In particular, | want to express my
heartfelt gratitude to members of the PVH Corp.
management, Mr Bill McRaith, Mr Mark Green and
Mr Roy Ashurst for sharing our vision and for their
indispensable contribution. We look forward to long-
term partnership and success together.
o I would also like to thank all the hardworking and
teachable workers of the Hawassa Industrial Park.
o | want to extend my appreciation to the people of
Hawassa and its surroundings for their hospitality
and to all relevant Regional, Zone and city officials
for the continued support they provided.
* Animportantaspect of the Hawassa Industrial Park is
the provision of a One Stop Service. To all government
agencies who supported us in providing high quality
business environment in the park, particularly,
the Ethiopian Revenue and Customs Authority,
Commercial Bank of Ethiopia, Main Department
of Nationality and Immigration Affairs, Ministry of
Labour and Social Affairs, electricity and telecom
utilities and also for the continuous and full support
of Ethiopian Airlines, | am grateful.
o would also like to thank the Chinese Civil Engineering
Construction Corporation (CCECC) and the indigenous
consulting firm, MH Engineering for building the
park to the highest standards.
o The construction of the rainwater drainage system
for Hawassa Industrial Park and city of Hawassa was
an arduous task. However, this was ably executed by
Hawassa City Administration, Ethiopia Road Authority,
the Federal Integrated Infrastructure Development
Coordinating Agency, Sino Hydro and AIC. Please
accept our heartfelt gratitude.
 For their continuous support in developing an effective
employee training program and technical assistance
in investment promotion and facilitation, | would like
to thank all our development partners particularly
the Government of the Peoples Republic of China,
DFID, Enterprise Partners, Tony Blair Institute, World
Bank and the International Finance Corporation.
o Finally, | want to thank the Ministry of Industry, the
Ethiopian Investment Commission, and the Board
and Management of the Industrial Park Development
Corporation and government police and security
agencies for tirelessly working day in, day out to
bring this project to successful fruition.
Speech by Bill McRaith,
Chief Supply Chain Officer
for PVH Corp, at the Grand
Production Inauguration of
Hawassa Industrial Park
June 20, 2017, Hawassa
Hello, and thank you all for being here!
My name is Bill McRaith, Chief Supply Chain Officer at PVH,
one of the largest apparel companies in the world and
parent company of Calvin Klein, Tommy Hilfiger and other
well-known brands. | am honored to be speaking today
on behalf of all the tenants of the Hawassa Industrial Park.
Today marks an exciting new chapter for the Park.
The progress we have made reflects the time that has
been invested by so many towards our goal to create
a vertical, scalable and sustainable venture in Ethiopia.
Our increased involvement in the region began in June
2015, after about a year of significant efforts by several
organizations, to have the African Growth and Opportunity
Act ("AGOA") renewed and extended for 10 years by the
United States Congress.
The Sub-Saharan region ultimately emerged as an attractive
option for apparel sourcing.
Since day 1, we set out to learn from social and environmental
challenges in other production countries, and establish
an operation we can be proud of.
And today, | can say that there is much to be proud of
and in my own 30 year experience there are many firsts:
eo Apark of this scale and the bringing together of all
the necessary ingredients to make it a success right
from the beginning. The Ethiopian Government, the
world's donor agencies, many of the world's best
apparel & related product manufacturers and PVH.
eo Justa few days ago | was part of a Panel at the US-
Africa Business Summitin Washington DC. On that
Panel the comment was made that a governments
job in industrialization is to get out of businesses
way. Where that may be true in many places, |
was proud to encourage the audience to look to
Ethiopia a North Star example, to understand what
can be achieved by having an active and visionary
government engaged from the beginning.
[} In the commitment to full value add, full verticality,
from the growing of the cotton to the finished product.
e To the scale of the park that allows the inclusion of
a woven fabric mill, from day one; something that
would normally take 5-10 years to arrive.
e To setting up an industrial park that complies with
international building and employment standards.
. The creation of a tenants association committed
to working together to ensure consistency within
the HIP, and
. At its heart; the investment and commissioning of
Africa's largest ZLD ETF, an investment that will show
the world there is no conflict between a company
doing well and a company doing right by the people,
the community and the environment it operates within.
At every step, we have been sensitive to the challenges
and conscious of the responsibilities that come with
industrializing a predominantly agricultural region.
| want to take this time to commend the extraordinary
efforts of everyone involved in helping to create this
best in class facility - without you none of this would
be possible.
To His Excellency Prime Minster, Hailemariam Desalegn:
thank you to you and your government for your continuous
support, and for your willingness and patience to partner
to create something special that has both scalable with
sustainable business practices.
| also want to thank:
* Special Advisor to the Prime Minister, Dr. Arkebe
Oqubay. Without his energy, his pragmatic and
relentless approach to support and elevate the
original vision, none of this may have happened.
[} President of SNNPR, Ato Dessie Dalkie
o The Mayor of Hawassa, Ato Tewodros Debaba
 Commissioner of the Ethiopia Investment Commission,
Ato Fitsum Arega and his team
eo CEO of the Industrial Park Development Corporation,
Ato Sisay Gemichu - and his team
o Ato Seleshi Lemma from the ETIDI
 Donor agencies DFID, GIZ, JICA
o All tenants of the Industrial Park
o Executive Vice President, Global Supply Chain, PVH Far
East Ltd. -Mark Green, who led the charge on behalf
of PVH to attract the suppliers and then helped lead
them through the many layers needed to construct
this Park as a state-of-the art, industry-leading park
| cannot stress enough how important the support of
everyone involved has been.
The whole world has much to be excited about when it
comes to our work in Ethiopia.
In fact, according to the recent 2017 UNCTAD Report,
Ethiopia has become one of the largest recipients of
foreign direct investment in apparel and textile industry
in 2016, second only to Vietnam.
This is an incredible achievement, and our goal is for
Ethiopia to become number one in 2017 and beyond.
The World Bank sees this cooperation between governments
and private enterprise as the way forward, and | couldn't
agree more.
Thankyou all again for being here today, and | look forward
to the future of the Hawassa Industrial Park.
HIP - eco-industrial park
HIP isthe first sustainable textile and apparel park in Africa.
Consistent with the Ethiopian Government's commitment
to a green-economy, HIP is designed, constructed and
operated as an eco-friendly park.
It has a water and waste treatment plant which uses the
latest technology for treating and recycling 100% of
the waste water discharge of the park and in doing so
supplying 90% of the water needs of the park.
To this end, the zero-liquid discharge (ZLD) facility is the
first of its kind in Africa, Apart from minimizing impact
on surrounding soil salinity, groundwater pollution or
ecology of river bodies, this technology helps conserve
water resource through recovery and re-use of treated
waste water The technology further enables recovery and
re-use of salt used in the textile dyeing process. For this
purpose, more than 32,700 m2 wide zero liquid discharge
(ZLD) facilities have been constructed and more than 1.5
kms of effluent Line; 13 kms of recycle water line; 15 kms
of sewerage line and more than 20 kms of integrated
drainage lines have been constructed.
The park is surrounded by a natural and green environment
- hence providing a soothing landscape.
Africa's largest ZLD ETF, an investment that will show the
world there is no conflict between a company doing well
and a company doing right by the people, the community
and the environment it operates within the investment and
commissioning of Africa's largest ZLD ETF, an investment
that will show the world there is no conflict between a
company doing well and a company doing right by the
people, the community and the environment it operates
within
Statement by Bill McRaith, Chief Supply Chain Officer for PVH Corp,
at the grand Production Inauguration the Hawassa Industrial Park,
Hawassa, June 20,2017
VE
SL NTN
BW Hawassa Industrial Park Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD) facility
Kx
0SS
ONESTOP
CEES
SERVICE
The design and construction of Hawassa
is conceived around energy and water
conservation principles - including;
Maximization of natural lightning and
natural ventilation,
Fitting of low consumption bulbs,
Recycling of well water, and
Solar powered LED street lights
As an Eco-Park, HIP is not only powered by
renewable electricity and many green features;
15 thousand trees are planted
There is an artificial pond for birds and fish
While the development of industrial parks normally
entails the creation of common services and amenities,
high-quality physical infrastructure and readily serviced
industrial land. However, at the core of the enterprise -
in the post-development phase of industrial parks - also
lies the need for the provision of a single, efficient and
streamlined one stop services to investors. Hence, a
mechanism must be put in place where governmental
agencies work with a shared and urgent sense of mission
and collaborate to create a vibrant plug and play business
environment in industrial parks.
This represents fundamental shiftin doing business within
the government structures - which cuts bureaucratic red
tape a great deal, helps to attract investment in industrial
parks and enhance Ethiopia's competitivenessin relation
to foreign direct investment. Given its extreme vitality,
the OSS scheme - along with the organs responsible
for its implementation on the ground - has been clearly
recognized under Investment Proclamation No.769/2012 (as
amended) and Industrial Parks Proclamation No.886/2015.
In this context, various measures have been adopted
to install a coordinated, effective and investor-friendly
government services platform both within and outside of
HIP. Among others the park features a fully equipped One
Stop Service building dedicated to bringing government
facilities closer to industries.
ONE STOP SERVICE
In addition a key strategic step adopted by the government
is also the assignment of operational responsibility of the
HIP to a private company in order to ensure top service
delivery to tenants and users of the park during the
crucial calibration and adjustment stages. This initiative
minimizes pains associated with IP operations by handing
over operational functions to the private sector and by
minimizing the incidences of poor experience in routine
management of the IP.
HIP - Investors
Today HIP accommodates fabric mill, garment and
interlining manufacturers. 18 leading foreign companies
have invested in the park while necessary preparations
are finalized to facilitate the joint investment of 4 domestic
industrialists that have been meticulously selected. One is
alredy operational. Entrants to HIP are carefully selected to
ensure cohesive and cordial relationships among investors
with a shared vision of ensuring higher productivity and
competitiveness in the park. Many of the companies in
HIP are currently operational and already have begun
exporting. At full capacity, the park is expected to generate
employment opportunity for close to 60,000 individuals
and export earnings of $1 billion
PVH - HIPs anchor investment : With a heritage going
back over 130 years, PVH Corp. has excelled at growing
brands and businesses with rich American heritages,
becoming one of the largest apparel companies in the
world. Today the company has over 30,000 associates
operating in over 40 countries with over $8.2 billion in
2016 revenue.
PVH owns the iconic Calvin Klein, Tommy Hilfiger, Van
Heusen, IZOD, ARROW, Speedo* Warner's and Olga
brands and market a variety of goods under these and
other nationally and internationally known, owned and
licensed brands.
As an anchor investor, PVH played a prominent role by
working hand-in-hand with the Government of Ethiopia
and actively supported the drive for targeted recruitment
of investors. To this end, it tapped into its impeccable list
of global vendors.
PVH has already commenced production in its manufacturing
facility and exported its first shipment from the park in
May, 2017. Seven of the companies that are operational
in HIP supply their products to PVH
PVH Corp. is an American clothing giant and owner of the big global
fashion brands such as Tommy Hilfiger, Calvin Klein, Speedo, IZOD, Van
Heusen, Arrow, Warner's and Olga. With distribution of its products to
more than hundred countries and global retail sales of close to $20 billion
in 2015, PVH stands as the second largest apparel company in the world.
While PVH currently sources a large share of its garment from Asia, it is
showing an increased interest to gradually shift its production base into
East Africa - a result of changing global economic dynamics such as
increased cost of production in Asia and the fast economic growth with
rising middle class society in Africa. It is with this perspective that PVH
has recently established its own production plant in Ethiopia's Hawassa
Industrial Park - the largest eco-industrial park in Africa located in the city
of Hawassa, 250km South of Addis Ababa.
PVHs direct investment on a fully vertically integrated supply chain in
Ethiopia is a remarkable shift fromits, and the industry's in general, usual
business model of sourcing or contract manufacturing - signifying the high
level of trust the company puts on Ethiopia's investment climate and its
grand plan of using Ethiopia as a manufacturing hub.
Recently interviewed on CNN, Marketplace Africa, Manny Chirico, the
CEO of PVH, gave a bullish testimonial of the excellence with which the
Government of Ethiopia is implementing its industrial policy and parks
development, placing the country as a preferred destination for foreign
directinvestmentand global sourcing. Asked how well PVH's plan of creating
a manufacturing hub in Ethiopia's Hawassa Industrial Park is unfolding
against the companys initial expectations, the CEO stated "it is really a
moving on plan and surprisingly moving very aggressively forward. We
are targeting first quarter of next year [2017] to actually begin production.
We are in the stages of factory being built and security and workforces at
this time. Africa for us represents 5% of our global production. So we have
always been there. We have seen the promise of Africa and the potential,
and we are trying to capture that now.
Further highlighting on the availability of skilled and trainable labour in
Ethiopia, PVH's CEO underlined there is an abundance of people, and
remarkably well educated [... ] It is a society that is really going into a
transition from an agricultural-based society to a manufacturing-based
society and hopefully in the future towards consumer-led economy. So
the key issue is job training. It is just a little bit different than running a
farm or working in an agricultural industry, so that issue needs to be really
focused. Asked about investment opportunities and challenges, the
CEO affirmed that some challenges do exist but opportunities outweigh
the challenges. The biggest challenge we are going to face is Ethiopia is
landlocked. So the challenges would be making sure that infrastructure
is in place to move the goods from factory to port. But | have to say, at
the point we are here, we have always been a pioneer from a sourcing
point of view. We were keen; we have started up in Bangladesh; we have
started up in China - we really have been ahead of the curve. Ethiopia, or
East Africa in general, is significantly ahead of where those other countries
were at respective time.
PVHs CEO further underlined on the huge sourcing potential Africa
presents to companies like PVH asserting that there is a business case
for them to gradually shift production and set a base in Africa. We are
targeting East Africa to represent in five years 25% of our production. To put
that into perspective Asia, led by China, Bangladesh and India, represent
about 75% of our production today. We would like to diversify that and
move a third of that production overtime into East Africa, and really use
that as a base. We believe it will give us a competitive advantage if itis
built appropriately; it will give us speed to market capability that doesnt
exist in Asia today. Africa today only represents about $40 million of our
global retail sales for all of our brands, which is almost $20 billion - small
percentage but growing very fast. Based on population size and if we
develop the middle class group in Africa, the potential for our brands
to do commerce and sale our goods, and become importers instead of
just exporters, is huge.
The CEO further stated that brands such as Tommy Hilfiger and Calvin
Klein are of high initial growth opportunity for African markets since they
are global brands with tremendous consumer recognition. We will be
producing some of those goods there with some of our other moderate
goods, we will start with using our eyes on, and then move towards our
higher-end brands. There is really a demand that is going to be built up
over time. We have seen it happen in other parts of the world. But the
potential in Africa is huge.
The whole world has much to be excited about when it comes to our work in Ethiopia
Bill McRaith, Chief Supply Chain Officer for PVH Corp, at the grand Production {inauguration the Hawassa Industrial Park, Hawassa, June 20, 2017
HIP - Human resource
The competitiveness of the manufacturing sector in
industrial parks greatly depends on the development of
human capital and multidimensional initiatives carried
out by various stakeholders to assure seamless supply of
skilled/productive labor force tuned to the specific needs of
enterprises. Capable, productive and disciplined workforce
- along with mechanisms and legislative frameworks that
facilitate better performance, productivity and industrial
harmony - are absolute preconditions for success in the
manufacturing sector. Human capital development schemes
must also be attended by continuous educational programs
that focus on soft skills such as instilling positive work
ethics and deconstructing unwarranted biases and flawed
perceptions by employees and the larger IP community.
Accordingly, parallel to putting together HIP's hard
infrastructure the government implemented various human
capacity development programs to meet the labor supply
and efficiency needs of the park.
Hawassa Industrial Park Sourcing and Training Employees
in the Region (HIPSTER):
The HIPSTER program is a collaborative public-private
platform established between apparel brands, manufacturers,
commercial service providers and Federal/Regional
government agencies (HIP Tenants Association, EP/DFID,
ETIDI, EIC and SNNPR Bureau of Trade and Industry) to
facilitate the sourcing, testing, grading and recruitment
of employees in HIP.
The program commenced on August 2016 and projected
to last for a period of two and half years. Itis implemented
with the main objective of developing a market-driven and
inclusive labour information, registration and preliminary
training system to facilitate employment opportunities
in HIP. Housed at the HIP, the program responds to key
constraints faced by factories in relation to the supply
of suitable labour force which has hitherto compelled
factories to produce below capacity. The four key triggers
for the intervention were identified as high absenteeism
and turn over, wages and rising living costs, lack of skills,
motivation and awareness of job opportunities, and poor
relationship between factory managers and employees.
HIPSTER's implementation strategy involved two tiers:
first, the establishment of market-driven system to match
manufacturers labour demand with job seekers through the
development of sustainable sourcing, screening, training
and placement mechanisms, and second, the training of
new entrants on soft-skills to improve performance, worker
engagement and motivation, and reduction of worker
absenteeism and turnover - which would eventually result
in increased productivity and lowered cost.
So far, the program has been able to reach out to a
significant number of job seekers, with greater outreach
to geographically and economically remote female job
seekers as compared to sourcing works pursued by
factories on their own. The soft skills training package
addressed various themes including workers industrial
work ethics, attitude, performance, vision building and
team work - responding to manufacturers demands.
Hawassa Industrial Park Center of Excellence for the
Textile and Apparel Sector
On top of the regular industrial/technical and human
resource training, the Center of Excellence will offer
training to employees (during the post-recruitment period)
on regular basis on subjects like improving performance
and productivity, enhancing workers engagement and
motivation, and work ethic issues (focusing on reducing
worker absenteeism and turnover);
Active consideration is also given in terms of expanding
the Center's mandate and facilities for purposes of
conducting executive-style training to staffs of the EIC/
IPDC on various themes - including the operation and
management of industrial parks.
i wl wl ol
The first and largest sustainable textile & apparel park in Africa;
* Inaugurated in 2016 with state-of the-art technology and world-class
infrastructures (features a zero liquid discharge technology (ZLD),
adheres to global quality/ audit certification including Customs-Trade
Partnership Against Terrorism (C-TPAT);
s Companies: PVH, Wuxi Jinmao Co. Ltd, Arvind Ltd. , Best Co. Pvt. Ltd,
Hirdaramani Garment PLC, HelaClothing Group, Quadrant Apparel
Group PLC, Raymond and Silver Spark Apparel Ltd, TAL Apparel, Indochine
International, Bussana Apparel Group, Giangsu Golden Island Group,
Chargeurs Fashion Technologies, Isabella and Sarasavi Export (PV4)
ltd, Everest, Ontex Group NV, EPIC Group, FCI Talisman (FCI Group)
 Products: Woven shirts, woven bottoms, sportswear, underwear
garments, synthetic tops, sokes & tights, women wears (blouse, dress,
skirts, etc)
Location
 ltis situated at the heart of the city of Hawassa - capital of the SNNPR
Population & employment
* 5 million people within 50 km radius
* Employing ~ 20,0000 workers
Industrial Park area
* Total land area of 3 million m2 (300ha)
* Total built-up area of 1.4 million m2 (140ha)
* 410,000 m2 factory shed built up area
Sheds
* Atotal of 52 factory sheds
 11 sheds of 11,000 m2, 35 sheds of 5,500 m2, and 6 specialized sheds
(tailored to the needs of investors)
Park Specialization
 HIP host investors leading apparel and textile manufacturers
Bole lemi Industrial Park
The park is 15 minutes drive from Bole-international airport;
It has a access to756km electric driven railway that connects Addis
Ababa to Djibouti;
Companies: Hosts leading manufacturers including George Shoe,
Shints ETP Garment PLC, Evertop Sportswear, etc.
Products: Women shoes, sandals, Sportswear, Shirts, trousers, Gloves,
jacket and shorts
 Located in the South Eastern part of Addis Ababa
 25 million people within 25 km radius
* Employing ~ 14,0000 workers
* Total area of 3.27 million m2 (327 hectares)
 Phase one: 1.56 million m2 (156 hectares)
 Phase two: 1.71 million m2 (171 hectares)
Sheds (Phase 1)
* Atotal of 20 sheds
 10 sheds of 5,500m2 and 11,00m2 each
 BLP hosts leading investors in textille & apparel and leather products
manufacturing sector
Mekelle Industrial Park
MIP was inaugurated in July, 2017;
The city of Mekelle has an international airport with 8 daily
flights from Addis Ababa;
A new electric-powered railway is under construction
and will soon connect the city to the Port of Djibouti. The
railway will guarantee efficient and eco-friendly cargo and
passenger transport service between the park and the
Port of Djibouti reducing travel time by more than 50%;
A 40 meters wide road will link MIP to the railway line
located 18 km from the park. The railway will guarantee
efficient and eco-friendly cargo and passenger transport
service between the park and the Port of Djibouti reducing
travel time by more than 50%;
Currently the park hosts leading manufacturers such as
Ananta Group (Two companies Calistoga & Strathmore), SCM
Garment Knit Tex ple, Pretty Industries ple, Pooja International
India and Laguz Stylish Garment manufacturing plc;
Products: Wearing apparel, Denim Composite, Knit Composite,
Sweaters, Apparel, Knit and ready made garments.
 Located at the heart of the capital city of Tigray Regional
State, Mekelle
* 1 million people in & around the city
* Expected to generate employment opportunity for about
20,000 employees
* Total land area of 10 million m?
 Ist phase: 1 million m?
 Phase 1- 100,000 m? factory shed built up area
* Atotal of 15 sheds
 5 sheds of 11,000 m2, 6 sheds of 5,500m2 & 4 sheds of
3,000 m?
* Hosts leading manufacturers in the textile & apparel and
leather products sector
Kombolcha Industrial Park
KIP was inaugurated in July, 2017;
KIP is located next to the Kombolcha airport, and is walking
distance from the railway line that connects the City to
Port of Djibouti;
KIP is located at 367 km distance from the Port of Djibouti;
The Kombolcha airport has regular flights to the capital city;
Companies: The park hosts leading textile & apparel
companies including Carvico S. p. A, an Italian company
globally known for its knitted synthetic fabrics used in
swimwear and sportswear; Trybus a US-company engaged in
the production of mens suits and Pungkook Corporation; (a
south Korean company known for supplying Micheal Kors)
Products: Synthetic fabrics, men's clothing, leather
bags, cotton yarn.
 Located in Amhara regional state, north central part of the
country
Population and employment
* 1.5 million people within 50 km radius of the city
* ltis expected to generate employment opportunity for about
20,000 employees when it is fully operational.
* Phase one: Total area of 75 hectare
 Factory built up area: 60,500 m?
* Atotal of 9 sheds
 2 sheds of 11,000m2 and 7 sheds of 5,500 m?
* KIP is designed to host investors in the Apparel &Textile and
Leather & leather products sector
Dire Dawa Industrial Park
* DDIP is located 318 km away from the Port of Djibouti and is
a few minutes away from the railway line; flights from Addis
Ababa and Djibouti;
* Dire Dawa Industrial Park is placed on the rail route that
connects Addis Ababa to Djibouti
s Companies; The park hosts leading textile & apparel companies
including Wuxi No1 (one of the leading textile manufacturers
in China that is doing its preparation to build its factory inside
the park compound
* Products: Cotton & blended fabrics, yarn & dyed fabric, leather
and leather products
ltis situated in the Eastern part of the country, at a proximity
distance from the Port of Djibouti - 348 Km.
* million people in & around the city
20,000 employees when it is fully operational
* Total size: 10 million m?
 Istphase: 1.5 million m?
 Factory built up area of 92,000 m?
 5shedsof 11,000m2, 6 sheds of 5,500m2 & 4 sheds of 3000 m?
* DDIP is designed to host investors in the Apparel & Textile,
Machinery, Chemical, Equipment, sector
Adama Industrial Park
AlP lies on the Addis Ababa-Djibouti railway at an approximate
distance of 678 km from Djibouti and has an express way
connection of 74 km from the countrys capital, Addis Ababa; The
park i not inaugurated.
* Companies: The park has garnered the interests of worldly
renowned apparel and textile companies such as Jiangsu
Sunshine and Kingdom, these two big textile companies have
started building their factories inide the park's compound
Products: Wool textile, linen yarn, fiber flax, sports wears, and
packaging
* [tis situated ~90 km South East of Addis Ababa.
* 450,000 people in and around the city
* |tis expected to generate employment opportunity for about
30,000 employees when it is fully operational
* Total land area of 1.2 million m2 (120 hectares)
 Factory built up area of 122,500 m?
 AIP hosts investors in apparel and textile manufacturing sector
Unlike others this park provides serviced land with major
infrastructure constructed like dedicated power, ETP&
STP for industrial & domestic waste water, telecom, OSS
facility, internal roads among others;
 |tislocated in Addis Ababa
* KIP is the one of closest park to Africa's largest international
airport
s Over 4 million people in the capital city
 Easy access to skilled manpower
Industrial park area
e Total land area of 2.79 million m?
 Factory built up area of 1.66 million m?
Park specialization
* KIP is designed to hostinvestorsin pharmaceutical manufacturing
sector
KEYPRINCIPLES OF THEPARK
PARKSPECIALIZATION Qui CK POPULATION & EMPLOYMENT
KIP
INDUSTRIALPARKFACILITIES
+ Noth
th
<S
QUICK p
MIP
. .
esesan?
KEYPRINCIPLES OF THE PARK
gi
BLIP
DIP
TRIALPARKFACILITIES INDUSTRIALPARKAREA
park k
apparel compa
PARK SPECIALIZATION Q U C K
AIP
INDUSTRIAL PARK FACILITIES INDUSTRIAL PARK AREA
of
122,500 m2
e890 ug,
oe o
SALITAVANY YA TYILSNANI
diy
 NOSLIV4
1NIWAOTdWIZNOILYINdOd ) J | N 0
NOILYZITYI93dS Yo d
NY4YdIHLI0STIINIYA AN
 TA
=  | [L] Fr a
aL
L|_=vio
NE
04. The Policy and Regulatory
Framework for Investment
Regulations
Since 2010, the Ethiopian government begun to follow
integrated five-year growth and transformation plans as
a central plank of its development programs. The first
of such plans, the Growth and Transformation Plan - |
(GTP-I) was implemented until 2015. The country has now
embarked on the Second Five-Year development plan,
GTP-Il, covering the period running from 2016-2020.
Both plans recognized private investment as one of the
primary engines of industrial development. Particularly, the
indispensable role of FDI has been included as an integral
part of the development strategy. Negative domestic
savings and the high demand for foreign exchanges as
well as transfer of technology and knowhow continue to
be major drivers of Ethiopia's openness to FDI.
GTP-ll targets to achieve a sustained double-digitannual
GDP growth with the ultimate objective of attaining a
middle-income status in 2025. It also projects to transform
the subsistence agriculture-based national economy into
a manufacturing-led economy. To realize these objectives,
emphasis has been placed on improving social services
and infrastructure, on ensuring stable macro-economic
policies, intensifying investment in industrial parks (both
state-run and private), and enhancing productivity in the
agriculture and manufacturing sectors.
The plan further identifies and incentivizes high priority
sectors of the economy open to FDI, which include
renewable energy, light manufacturing, agribusiness,
construction, healthcare, textiles and apparel, sugar,
chemicals, pharmaceutical, mineral and steel industry,
leather products, value-added services, and aviation
support services and products. Investors, especially those
who engage in priority sectors, benefit from multi-layered
incentives packages including the repatriation of investment
and profits, easy procedures in hiring expatriate personnel,
and temporary tax exemption and duty free importation
of capital goods and other inputs.
The Investment Proclamation of 2012, amended in 2014,
along with the Regulation on Investment Incentives
adopted in the same year, and amended in 2014,
provide the main regulatory regime. These laws establish
economic sectors open to FDI, the requirements for FDI
investment monitoring and reporting requirements, and
the fiscal incentives that are available to investors. A brief
account of the core features of the regulatory regimes is
presented below.
Economic sectors open to FDI
As indicated above, all manufacturing sectors, mining and
most of the major other economic sectors are open to
foreign investment. A few investment areas exclusively
reserved to Ethiopian nationals include: banking, insurance
and financial services; broadcasting; Few other areas are
reserved for joint venture investment with the government.
In the meantime Gok has exerted increasing efforts to
widen the economic sectors open to FDI. The law provides
flexibility on the restrictions of FDls by empowering the
Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) - the investment
regulatory body - to authorize select foreign investments in
areas which are otherwise exclusively reserved to domestic
investors. The Ethiopian Investment Board, chaired by
the Prime Minister, dispenses such authorization taking
into account the role of the specific project in promoting
national interest. The Board is also authorized to grant
new or additional incentives other than those provided
under the existing regulations.
>
Capital requirement
Foreign capital brought to Ethiopia for every investment
project is required to meet a certain threshold and be
registered with the EIC. The minimum capital requirement
for a project wholly-owned by a foreign investor is
US$200,000. The capital requirement goes down to
US$150,000 if the project is jointly undertaken with
domestic investor/s. A different capital threshold is set
for foreign investments in architectural or engineering
works or related technical consultancy services, technical
testing and analysis publishing is not allowed to FP by a
different law which is US$100,000. The capital threshold
falls down to US$50,000 if such investment is made in
partnership with a domestic investor. The requirement of
minimum capital allocation does not apply to a foreign
investor who reinvests profits or dividends.
Monitoring and reporting
For the purpose of close follow-up and monitoring, both
foreign and domestic investors are required to submit
progress reports to the EIC on the status of their projects;
such reports shall be delivered every three months once
the original investment permit has been issued. Investors
shall also provide all such information which may be
needed by the EIC in relation to investment projects.
 Addis Aballep
Investment incentives
Ethiopia offers quite an attractive package of financial
incentives, including income tax exemption and duty-
free import, for investments in high priority areas such in
manufacturing and agriculture sectors. The investment
incentives are not limited to those already outlined
under the law; the Ethiopian Investment Board (EIB) is
authorized to grant investors additional incentives taking
into account the contribution of the specific project to
the national economy.
The tax incentives range from 1 - 15 years of income tax
exemption - depending on sector and type of investment.
As the location of an investment is situated further from
Addis Ababa, the investment attracts more tax incentives.
Another two years of income tax exemption is extended
to export-oriented investment projects, which either
directly export or supply to an exporter as production or
service input, at least 60% of their products or services.
The income tax exemption period runs from the
commencement date of production or the provision of
service; in case where an investor incurs loss during the
exemption period, it is possible to carry forward such
loss for half of the exemption period after the expiry of
such period. For a maximum of 5 years. Similar incentives
apply for expansion and upgrade of existing investments.
Duty-free incentive is provided to investors who import
capital goods and construction materials necessary for
the establishment of new projects or the expansion/
upgrading of the existing ones.
Industrial Park developers enjoy 10-15 years corporate
income tax exemption depending on the investment
location.
4.2 General Measures
Affecting FDI
Taxation
The Ethiopian tax system has undergone continuous
reforms especially from 2002 onwards. The tax laws have
been repeatedly revisited and the office in charge of
enforcing the laws - the Ethiopian Revenue and Customs
Authority - ERCA, - has been restructured to make the
system more accessible, efficient and effective. Efforts
are also underway to standardize accounting practices
and, in turn, to improve the accuracy of tax and other
operating liability assessments.
The main types of taxes applicable in Ethiopia are: income
tax on salaries and dividends, profit tax on business,
custom duty, excise and VAT. Income taxable under the
new Income Tax Proclamation No. 979/ 2016 includes:
income from employment, business activities, personal
activities, entrepreneurial activities by non-residents,
movable property, immovable property, alienation property,
dividends distributed by resident company, profit shares
paid by registered partnerships, interest paid by national,
regional or local governments, and license fees.
Direct taxes
The business income tax rate for companies is flatly set at
30%. As per the new Income Tax Proclamation, individual
taxpayers with a business income ranging from ETB 7200 -
130,800 pay between 10% - 30%. For the amount beyond
ETB 130,800, a flat rate of 35% is levied. For the purpose
of taxation, an individual is deemed a resident of Ethiopia
if he/she has permanent residence in the country or has
stayed in Ethiopia for 183 days, in a period of twelve
calendar months, whether continuously or intermittently.
Incomes from employment and rental of buildings are
taxed at a progressive rate ranging from 0% - 35%. Under
the new law, the exemption thresholds for employment
income tax and rental of building are raised from ETB
150 to 600 (per month) and from 1800 to 7200 per year,
respectively.
Indirect taxes
A business with an annual turnover of ETB 500,000 and
above shall register for Value Added Tax (VAT), the rate of
which is 15%. Businesses with taxable annual transaction
of less than ETB 500,000 are charged with Turnover Tax
(ToT) of 2% and 10%.
In addition to sales tax, excise tax is charged on various
consumers goods like alcohol, tobacco, salt, fuel,
television sets, cars, carpets and toys. The tax rates vary
from 10% on receivers, garments and textiles of any type
and fabrics to 100% on perfumes, vehicles above 1,800
cc and alcoholic drinks.
No export tax is imposed in Ethiopia.
Foreign exchange regulation
and transfer of capital
Access to foreign exchange is regulated by the National
Bank of Ethiopia (NBE)- the central bank of the country. The
national currency of Ethiopia, Birr, is not freely convertible.
Foreign exchange transactions need the approval of the
NBE. Investors need to request for foreign exchange
ahead of time since the process may take time.
Non-resident Ethiopians and non-resident foreign nationals
of Ethiopian origin can establish and operate foreign
currency accounts of upto US$50,000.
All foreign investors can remitout of Ethiopia profits and
dividends, principals and interest on foreign loans, and
fees related to technology transfer in convertible foreign
currency at prevailing rate of exchange. They can also
remit proceeds from the sale or liquidation of assets,
from the transfer of shares or of partial ownership of an
enterprise, and funds required for debt servicing or other
international payments. Similar privilege extends to expats
allowing them to remit their salaries.
Labor markets regulation
Competitive labor cost is among the key pulls of FDI
in Ethiopia. The country is the second most populous
nation in Africa with active workforce constituting more
than 50% of its total population. The labor market
offers a huge number of trainable manpower with
a very competitive cost. Since there is no national
minimum wage set by the government, wage is often
determined by market forces.
Ethiopia is signatory to eight Core ILO Conventions. In
tune with the undertakings entered under the conventions,
Ethiopia's national laws criminalize, inter alia hazardous
works and worst forms of child labor. The labor proclamation
lays down the minimum work conditions employers shall
comply with so as to maintain industrial peace and safety.
Workers are allowed to exercise their rights to associate
and organize by establishing labor unions under the
umbrella of the Confederation of Ethiopian Trade Unions
(CETU). Generally, employer-employee relationships in
Ethiopia are smooth and workers strike is uncommon
across industries.
Land and property rights
The FDRE Constitution recognizes and protects ownership
of private property, which includes the rights to acquire,
use and dispose objects of tangible or intangible nature.
However, the right to ownership of land (both urban and
rural) and other natural resources is exclusively vested in
the State and in the people of Ethiopia. Investors exercise
use right over lands and ownership right over the buildings
and any other value they add to the land. Investors can
mortgage their rental (lease) right to access credit.
Land is allocated for investment at a competitive price
through a lease agreement that runs up to 99 years for
residential and 70 years for business. The government
is strongly committed to provide fertile rural land for
large-scale commercial farms. Urban land is allocated
for investment in two ways depending on the purpose:
if itis for industrial uses, an investor can acquire land in
one of the industrial parks built by the government, or
private sector at a fixed price. For other purposes, land
is obtained only through auction.
SEE Le i re
Environmental management
The Got is committed to build a climate-resilient green
economy by making all development projects environment-
friendly. The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
Proclamation introduced in 2002 requires that an EIA
process be undertaken on all development projects that
are likely to have negative impact on the environment.
The judiciary and rule of law
In Ethiopia the federal Constitution is supreme law of the
land. The Constitution recognizes international treaties
ratified by Ethiopia as integral part of the national laws. With
regard to the interpretation of human rights provisions of
the Constitution international treaties tend to take even a
higher position than the Constitution. The Ethiopian legal
system is mainly continental with some mixed features
in procedural and other aspects. The parliament (the
House of People Representatives at the federal and State
Councils, at the regional state levels) is the only organ
vested with inherent law-making power. The legal system
relies on codified laws such as civil, penal, civil procedure,
and penal procedure, commercial and maritime codes.
All laws passed by the legislator are published in official
gazettes (Negarit Gazeta).
The Judiciary is established by the FDRE Constitution
with full institutional and individual independence. All
federal matters are entertained by federal courts while
state matters goes to state courts. To ensure consistency
of legal interpretation and promote predictability of
courts the Federal Supreme Court Cassation Division is
empowered to give binding legal interpretation on all
federal and state matters.
Besides the regular courts, alternative dispute resolution
(ADR) mechanisms are also legally recognized and widely
used means of commercial dispute resolutions in Ethiopia.
The 1960 Civil Code provides the basic rules governing
Compromise, Mediation and Arbitration. Especially
arbitration is becoming practiced means of dispute
settlement among the business community. Institutional
arbitration is also facilitated by Ethiopian Arbitration and
Conciliation Center, established under Addis Ababa
Chamber of Commerce.
ope
Competition
Ethiopia enacted Trade Competition and Consumers
Protection Proclamation (No. 813/207 3) with the objectives
of protecting the business community from anti-competitive
and unfair market practices and also consumers from
misleading market conducts. The government office
in charge of overseeing proper implementation of the
proclamation is Trade Practice and Consumers Protection
Authority (TPCPA).
TPCPA is mandated with promoting a competitive business
environment and enhancing economic efficiency and
social welfare, by regulating anti-competitive, unethical,
and unfair trade practices. It has also an administrative
tribunal with a jurisdiction on matters pertaining to market
competition and consumer protection. Over the last three
years the tribunal has entertained many cases of consumer
protection and unfair trade practices.
Protection of intellectual
property rights
Ethiopia is a member of the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO). It has also passed a number of
national laws to ensure the protection of intellectual
property rights such as patent, industrial design, copy
right and neighboring rights, and trademarks. A distinct
government office, Ethiopian Intellectual Property Office
(EIPO), is established to oversee proper enforcement
of intellectual property rights. The Office also provides
registration service for intellectual property rights such
as trademark, patent and copyright.
Although both the protection of intellectual property
rights and the capacity of EIPO are generally criticized
for being weak, efforts are being exerted to improve the
situation. The government has shown interest to accede
the Berne Convention for Literary and Artistic Works
and the Madrid System for the International Registration
of Marks. EIPO is improving its institutional capacity by
attracting skilled manpower.
Trade integration
Ethiopia has engaged in numerous trade negotiations at
the regional and international levels. It is an observer of the
World Trade Organization (WTO) and isin the process of
accession. Ethiopia has been a member of the Common
Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) since
its foundation in 1993.
With respect to market access, Ethiopia has wide
opportunities which are far from being fully utilized. As a least
developed country (LDC), it enjoys preferential treatment
offered by many of its trading partners. By virtue of the
European Union's Everything But Arms (EBA) program
and the United States African Growth and Opportunity
Act (AGOA) Ethiopia is granted duty-free, quota-free
access to the largest foreign markets for virtually all of its
exports. The country also enjoys tariff preferences under
the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) in Australia,
Canada, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, and Switzerland.
Ethiopia benefits from preferential marketaccess in China,
India, Russia, the Republic of Korea, and Turkey.
Preferential market access opportunities
The African Growth and
Opportunity Act (AGOA)
The African Growth Opportunity Act (AGOA) is initiated
through the United States Trade and Development
Act of 2000. It provides the most liberal trade
opportunity for export products originating from
eligible Sub-Saharan African countries to enter US
markets under duty-free and quota-free treatment.
The initiative works towards developing Africa's
trade integration with US markets. Only Sub-Saharan
African countries are considered for eligibility, and
in this light, AGOA beneficiary statuses have been
awarded to approximately 40 countries - with the
numbers changing from time to time. Ethiopia has
been eligible since January 2001. The preferential
scheme is recently extended to the year 2025 and
hence continues to provide advantageous market
access to exporters from Ethiopia.
AGOA eligibility does not imply automatic eligibility
under the textile and apparel provisions which
require the implementation of effective visa system
and enforcement mechanisms to prevent illegal
transshipment. A special rule named Third Country
Fabric Provision (TCFP) permits lesser developed
AGOA beneficiary countries like Ethiopia to utilize
fabric manufactured anywhere in the world.
The Everything-But-Arms
(EBA) Scheme
The EBA is part of European Union's Generalized
System of Preferences (GSP), a non-reciprocal scheme
introduced by the EU in 2001 to give all LDCs full
duty free and quota-free access to EU for all their
exports - with the exception of arms and armaments.
In principle the scheme runs for an unlimited period
of time and is not subject to periodic reviews or
renewal. The initiative also provides for a transition
period of three years when Ethiopia moves up to
the Developing Country status.
China - Duty Free Quota
Free (DFQF) for LDCs
As a part of its commitment under the WTO, and
within the framework of the Forum on China-
Africa Cooperation (FOCAC), China announced
on January 1, 2005 that 190 items from 25 SSA
LDCs will be granted Duty Free Quota Free (DFQF)
treatment to its Market. On 1 January 2008, the
decision was expanded to a total of 30 LDCs in
Africa. The programme initially implemented a
zero tariff treatment for 60 per cent of products
in China's tariff schedule (4788 tariff lines (8-digit
level)) which represented more than 95 per cent
of products imported from beneficiary countries:
Ethiopia and China signed an agreementenabling
the preferential trade agreement on January 2010.
China progressively opened its market by expanding
the coverage of the program to 97 per cent of
its tariff lines as of 2015. The list of beneficiaries
has also been adjusted over the years, covering
40 LDCs by December 2015. The program is
implemented for an indefinite period of time on
a non-reciprocal basis and unconditionally for all
LDC's that have diplomatic relations with China.
In addition to the above, Ethiopia is a member
of COMESA (Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa), 20 member state regional
integration framework with large market potentials
serving a population of about 400 million.
Name Type Sub- Provider(s) Initial Entry
schemes Into Force
Generalized System of Preferences GSP 1 Australia 1/1/1974
- Australia
Generalized System of Preferences GSP 1 Canada 7/1/1974
- Canada
Generalized System of Preferences GSP 2 European Union 7/1/1971
- European Union
Generalized System of Preferences GSP 0 Iceland 1/29/2002
- Iceland
Generalized System of Preferences GSP 1 Japan 8/1/1971
- Japan
Generalized System of Preferences GSP 1 New Zealand 1/1/1972
- New Zealand
Generalized System of Preferences GSP 2 Norway 10/1/1971
- Norway
Generalized System of Preferences GSP 1 Belarus; 1/1/2010
- Russian Federation, Belarus, Kazakhstan;
Kazakhstan Russian Federation
Generalized System of Preferences GSP 1 Switzerland 3/1/1972
- Switzerland
Generalized System of Preferences GSP 2 Turkey 1/1/2002
- Turkey
Generalized System of Preferences GSP 1 United States 1/1/1976
- United States
Duty-Free Tariff Preference LDC-specific 0 India 8/13/2008
Scheme for LDCs
Duty-free treatment for African LDC-specific 0 Morocco 1/1/2001
LDCs - Morocco
Duty-free treatment for LDCs - LDC-specific 0 Chile 2/28/2014
Chile
Duty-free treatment for LDCs - LDC-specific 0 China 7/1/2010
China
Duty-free treatment for LDCs - LDC-specific 0 Taipei, Chinese 12/17/2003
Chinese Taipei
Duty-free treatment for LDCs - LDC-specific 0 Kyrgyz Republic 3/29/2006
Kyrgyz Republic
Duty-free treatment for LDCs - LDC-specific 0 Thailand 4/9/2015
Thailand
Preferential Tariff for LDCs - LDC-specific 0 Korea, Republic of 1/1/2000
Republic of Korea
African Growth and Opportunity Other PTAs 3 United States 5/18/2000
Act
m
 A high-level delegation of the Government of Ethiopia, led by H. E
Dr. Arkebe Oqubay, participated atthe World Bank Group Investment
Competitiveness Forum held in Vienna on October 25, 2017.
Administration
The Ethiopian Investment
Commission
The Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) is the principal
government organ responsible for promoting, coordinating
and facilitating domestic and foreign investment in
Ethiopia. EIC is established under Investment Proclamation
No.769/2012 (as amended) and the Council of Ministers
Regulation No. 3173/2014. Functionally, The EIC is overseen
by the Ethiopian Investment Board (EIB) - a governing
body chaired by the Prime Minister and composed of
government officials designated by the Prime Minister
wherein the EIC serves as its secretariat.
At the local levels, the respective regional investment
agencies have been established to promote and handle
regional investments. Regional investment agencies
and the EIC work hand in glove in all matters relating to
investment promotion and facilitation.
To see Ethiopia as one of the leading investment destinations
in Africa and transition into a middle income country status
by 2025.
ad
To bring rapid, sustainable and equitable economic growth
in the country through the implementation of research-based
investment promotion, the provision of one stop service and
support system to enable the procurement of competent investors
who can produce quality and value added products - primarily
for export purpose and mainly operating within industrial parks.
 E1C
ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT C OMMISSIO N
PATER Ee ATa0toerd hol 7
History
Ethiopia opened its first investment promotion agency in
1993 after a new regime led by the incumbent party - the
Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front - took
power in the country. The institution was first established
under Investment Proclamation No.15/1992 as the Ethiopian
Investment Agency. It was later re-established as the
Ethiopian InvestmentAuthority by virtue of Proclamation
No.37/1988. lt was again reorganized and reconstituted
with two subsequent Proclamations Proclamation
No.280/1994 and Proclamation No. 471/1998. Since
August 2014, it has been reestablished as the Ethiopian
Investment Commission (Council of Ministers Regulation
No. 313/2014). When it started operation, the Commission
was functionally organized through 5 divisions delivering
four major services and utilizing its fifty four employees.
The Commission had gone through different forms of
accountability at different times. In the beginning, it was
functionally answerable to the Investment Board, later
to the Ministry of Trade and Industry and to the Industry
Ministry, and currently to the Prime Minister's Office.
o
Functions
The principal duties and responsibilities of the EIC include:
o Promoting, coordinating and expanding investment
activities;
 Generating and implementing policy issues required
for creating suitable and competitive investment
climate;
 Negotiating and signing bilateral investment expansion
and protection agreements with countries from which
potential investment originates;
o Preparation and dissemination of investment
information in the form of texts films and digital
mediums, hosting and undertaking exhibitions and
trade fairs, holding research expos and seminars both
within the country and abroad, participating in similar
events hosted by others, and providing training on
issues of promotion and expansion of investment;
 Working on and coordinating the creation of cooperative
and complementary relationships among investors,
government offices, regional governments and
other related stake-holders on matters of investment
promotion and facilitation;
eo Collecting, organizing, analyzing, updating and
disseminating all investment related information;
 Preparing and promoting investment opportunity
statements, and upon request, providing assistance
to companies looking for joint ventures;
 Issuing, renewing and canceling investment permits
within its jurisdiction, and registering foreign
investment capitals;
o Registering investment related technology transfer
agreements;
 Registering agreements between foreign enterprises
and local investors notinvolving the pooling of capital;
e Tracking the progress of licensed investment projects,
checking compliance with all requirements of licenses,
and ensuring that all incentives are employed for
the designated purposes;
Providing investors with information, advisory and
technical support services, organizing information
to facilitate forward and backward linkages) of
resources among enterprises;
Providing post investment support and follow-up
services jointly with other responsible institutions;
Providing advisory and technical supports to regional
investment bureaus and hosting joint meetings and
discussions;
Enhancing the knowledge of investors on the
Investment Proclamation and related regulatory
instruments; and
Resolving investment bottlenecks along with other
concerned government bodies
THE OFFICE
OF THE PRIME
MINISTER
COMMISSION
Over the years, the commission has undertaken a range of
measures to ensure the efficiency of the service it renders
and thereby increase client satisfaction levels. Following
the implementation of Business Process Re-engineering
(BPR), the Commission's working procedures have been
improved; for example, the time it takes to get license
and effect registration has been reduced to 1 days from
the previous two weeks The Commission has also put in
place complaint handlings system through which clients
submit their grievance on the quality of services received
and get the issues solved hierarchically. Work ethics and
anti-corruption manuals have also been amended to
thwart employees misconduct which often generates
the dissatisfaction of clients.
INVESTMENT BOARD
* EIB Is chaired by the PM
+ This Board consists of senior
government representatives from
Forelgn Affairs, industry Finance,
Agriculture, ERCA, National Bank
and Clty of Addis and Its key role Is
lead overall Investment and industrial
Park Policy making In Ethiopla
EIC's major activities
The Growth and Transformation Plans (GTP |&ll): Among
the national objectives articulated under the national
growth and transformation plans (GTP 1&ll), enhancing
the role of investment in pursuing the countrys economic
transformation has been highlighted as the most vital.
Hence during both phases of the planning periods, the
EIC - being the primary institution - has endeavoured
to work on the implementation of the stated objectives.
EIC restructuring
Over the past three years, EIC has commissioned an
independent review of its activities and institutional
structure in an effort to streamline the countrys investment
framework. Following the studies, the EIC embarked on
the restructuring of its institutional setup to meet the
changing dynamics of investment in the country, attend
to the growing number and size of investment inflows and
respond efficiently to the requirements of new frontiers
in the investment landscape of the country such as the
development of industrial parks. .
One - Stop Services:
EIC provides a dedicated one-stop service to all foreign
investors at the headquarter and at its branches opened
in Industrial Parks in Ethiopia. Among others if;
o Provides the necessary information required by
investors;
 Receives investment applications;
 Registers newly incorporated business organizations;
J Notarizes constituting documents;
 Approves and issues investment permits to foreign
o Issues trade and operating licenses to approved
foreign investments;
. Approves and registers technology transfer agreements;
. Provides advisory and aftercare services to investors;
 Approves expatriate posts and issues work permits
to foreign employees;
 Approve investment incentives
facilitates the acquisition of land by foreign investors in
accordance with the relevant laws of the Federal and
Regional Governments.
Other activities:
Over the past years, the EIC has recorded praiseworthy
achievements in terms of investment promotion through the
provision of general and targeted investment recruitment
activities.
eo The EIC has also provided follow up, facilitation and
aftercare services to different projects to enable them
transition to the implementation and operational
stages;
e TheElC has conducted several empirically enriched
researches to generate new policy insights and adopt
strategic directions that foster better investment
e TheElChasnegotiated and signed bilateral investment
agreements with countries from which high turnover
of foreign direct investment is expected to come.
 EIC coordinates GOE's investment climate improvement
measures including improving the countrys WB
doing business ranking (DB)
o EIC undertakes various investment policy dialogue
(PPD's)
05 Ethiopia: Global Recognition
for Excellence in Investment
UNITED NATIONS AWARD FOR PROMOTING
INVESTMENT IN THE SUSTNABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS
(SDGS) - 2017
The Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) won the 2017
United Nations award for outstanding performance in targeted
promotion, facilitation and execution of sustainable investment
projects.
This prestigious award is granted to a national Investment
Promotion Agency (IPA) in recognition of its exceptional
achievements in promoting and facilitating Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) that contributes towards the realization
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The winner
is selected by a committee comprising the United Nations
in collaboration with the World Association of Investment
Promotion Agencies (WAIPA), which has over 170 members
in 130 countries.
The Award was announced by the Secretary-General of the
(UNCTAD) during the UNCTAD Investment, Enterprise
and Development Commission Meeting on 20 November
2017, in Geneva, Switzerland.
UNCTAD remarked that Ethiopia won based on the criteria
of effectiveness of its investment promotion agency in
promoting and facilitating FDI projects, evidence of
positive results from the promotion and facilitation
services, and contribution of its FDI projects to the
realization of the SDGs.
construction and operation of Hawassa Industrial
Park was highly commended as exemplary for other
countries. Ethiopia's deliberate policy choice to promote
labour-intensive industries such as textile and apparel
that provide job opportunities for youth and create equal
opportunities for women; its compliance with high social
and environmental standards on the development
and operation of industrial parks; its targeted investor
recruitment strategy and attraction of leading global
firms; and its dedicated effort in establishing the OSS
and other investor-friendly reforms all contributed to
the decision to grant this award to Ethiopia.
N ruum cul /
@
Won saw aoe
Forum 2017
Bem uniens
Competitiveng
Forum 201
 woriosuucancue
Competitivenes
stment
uInpeLTveness
Worlo saver
[Vdd
gESTMENT
ERS
K
BANK
GROUP
petitivel
m 2017
WORLD BANK GROUP STAR REFORMER AWARD FOR
STELLAR PERFORMANCE ON INVESTMENT POLICY
REFORM AND PROMOTION
Ethiopia won World Bank's Star Reformer Award
for its effective foreign direct investment (FDI) related
reforms and resulting success.
In granting such a prestigious international recognition to
Ethiopia, the World Bank Group appreciated the high-level
political commitment the Government of Ethiopia has
demonstrated towards FDI attraction and facilitation
through the realization of targeted policy reforms.
According to the World Bank Group, conventional
international indicators used for measuring reforms around
the ease of doing business by small and medium firms
do not capture the transformational investment policy
and promotion reforms that can enhance flow of FDI.
Thus key reforms impacting FDI and its spillover effects
on the domestic economy may go unnoticed. The Star
Reformer Award thus aims to increase the visibility of
such transformational reforms and showcase success
stories realized by committed governments such as
that of Ethiopia. The World Bank Group is working very
closely with the Government of Ethiopia in fostering such
transformational reforms that can maximize potential
benefits of FDI and in harnessing linkages with the
domestic economy.
Such an award forms the highest level of international
recognition to the tireless effort of the Government of
Ethiopia in attracting and facilitating transformational
investments into Ethiopia. This is testament yet that Ethiopia
is rightly positioned to realize its vision of becoming
a leading manufacturing hub in Africa by 2025.
Several strategic reforms have been putin place by the
Government of Ethiopia to attract leading manufactures to
Ethiopia and enhance their competitiveness of which the
key ones include: development of industrial parks with
a plug-and-play environment; design of legislations
that regulate and facilitate industrial park programs;
formulating targeted and sector-specific incentive
instruments and other government support measures;
as well as implementation of targeted and proactive
investors recruitment.
Licensing and Registration Process
in Ethiopia
Ethiopia's new Investment Permit Application process is
simple and requires only a few steps:
These steps vary slightly depending on the business form
under which investors plan to operate their business:
Sole Proprietorship
s Step 1: Collectinformation from Ethiopian Investment
Commission (EIC) Information and Investment
Promotion Department about requirements,
incentives, etc.
 Step 2: Collectapplication form from Information
Desk.
* Step 3: Submit application with passport and
visa to start new investment permit application in
Licensing and Registration Department.
* Step 4: Collect bank letter from Licensing and
Registration Department to open an account at
National Bank of Ethiopia.
 Step 5: Transfer/deposit cash in an opened bank
account.
* Step 6: Collect confirmation letter from bank
which states the bank account is already opened
and money is transferred/deposited.
* Step 7: Collectinvestment permit certificate from
Private Limited Company (PLC)
 Step 1: Collectinformation from Information and
Investment Promotion Directorate about requirements,
* Step 2: Collect application form memorandum
and article of association from Information Desk.
* Step 3: Submit draft memorandum and article of
association in Licensing and Registration Department
 Step 3: Check uniqueness of the company name
from Ministry of Trade (MoT) database
* Step 4: Collect letter of clearance for unique
company name from Licensing and Registration
Department
* Step 5: Edit and authenticate memorandum and
article of association in Licensing and Registration
Department.
* Step 6: Collect letter to the National Bank of Ethiopia
from Licensing and Registration Department to open
an account at the bank.
e Step 7: Open an account in the bank and transfer/
deposit money.
| I |
REGISTRATION EE
* Step 8: Collect confirmation letter from the
bank which states the bank account is already
opened and money transferred, authenticated
lease agreement from documentation and
authentication office and TIN number from
CUSTOM and Revenue office.
* Step 9: Fill application form /profile/ available
at EIC Information Desk.
* Step 10: Collectinvestment permit certificate
and principal registration from Licensing and
Registration Department
Branch/ Multinational Company
* Step 1: Collect information from Information
and Investment Promotion Directorate about
requirements, incentives, etc
* Step 2: Collect application form from EIC
Information Desk
* Step 3: Submit application, authenticated
parent (mother) company document, new
company general manager's passport and visa
in Licensing and Registration Department to
start new investment permit
* Step 4: Collect a letter to the National Bank
of Ethiopia from Licensing and Registration
Department of EIC to open an account in a bank
* Step 5: Open an account at the bank and
transfer/deposit cash
and money is transferred/deposited
* Step 7: Collect investment permit certificate
from Licensing and Registration Department
Key Contacts
Ethiopian Investment
P. O. Box 2313
Tel: +251-11-551 0033
Fax: +251-11-551 4396
E-mail: ethiopian. invest@
ethionet. et
Website: eia. gov. et
Corporation (IPDC)
Tel: +251-11-661 6986 / 661
6674
E-mail: info@ipdc. gov. et
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
P. O. Box 393
Tel: +251-11-551 7345
Fax: +251-11-551 4300/ 551
1244
E-mail: mfa. addis@telecom. net. et
Ministry of Industry
P. O. Box 5641
Tel: +251-11-551 8025-29
Fax: + 251-11-551 4288
Ministry of Trade
P. O. Box 704
Tel: +251-11-551 8025
Fax: + 251-11-551 5411
Ministry of Culture and Tourism
P. O. Box 1907
Tel: +251-11-515 6711
Fax: + 251-11-551 2889
E-mail: tour -com@ethionet. et
Ministry of Agriculture
P. O. Box 62347
Tel: + 251-111-551 8040/ 551
7354
Fax: +251-11-551 1543
E-mail: vmoasc@ethionet. et
Ministry of Finance & Economic
P. O. Box 1905
Tel: +251-11-155 2400
Fax: +251-11-156 0124
Ministry of Mines
P. O. Box 486
Tel: +251-11-646 3166
Fax: +251-11-646 3364
E-mail: information@mom. gov. et
Ministry of Labor & Social Affairs
Addis Ababa
P. O. Box 2056
Tel: +251-11-551 7080
Fax: +251-11-551 8396
E-mail: molsa. comt@ethionet. et
Ethiopian Revenue and Customs
Authority
P. O. Box 2559
Tel: +251-11-466 7666
Fax: +251-11-466 8244
E-mail: erca@ethionet. et
Ethio-telecom
P. O. Box 1047
Tel: 251-11-551 0500
Fax: 251-11-551 5777
E-mail: etc. commun@ethionet. et
National Bank of Ethiopia
P. O. Box 5550
Tel: +251-11-551 7430
Fax: +251-1-551 4588
E-mail: nbe. excd@ethionet. et
Ethiopian Electric Service
P. O. Box 1233
Tel: 251-11-155 0811
Fax: 251-11-155 2345
E-mail: eelpa@ethionet. et
Central Statistical Agency
P. O. Box 1143
Tel: 251-11-155 3011
Fax: 251-11-155 0334
E-mail: csa@ethionet. et
Ministry of Environmental
Protection & Forestry
P. O. Box 12760
Tel: +251-11-646 5007
Fax: +251-11-646 4882
E-mail: esid@ethionet. et
Development Bank of Ethiopia
P. O. Box 1900
Tel:
Fax:
E-mail:
Website: www. dbe. com. et
Ethiopian Chamber of Commerce
and Sectoral Associations
P. O. Box 517
Tel: 251-111-551 8240
Fax: 251-11-551 7699
E-mail: etchamb@ethionet. et
Ethiopian Horticulture Producers
& Exporters - Association
Association (EHPEA)
Tel: 2561-11-663 6750/663 6751
Fax: 251-11-663 6753
E-mail: ehpea@ethionet. et
Addis Ababa Chamber of
Commerce and Sectoral
Associations
P. O. Box 2458
Tel: 251-111-552 8120
Fax: 251-11-551 1479
E-mail: aachamber1@ethionet. et
Ethiopian Leather Industries
Association (ELIA)
P. O. Box 12898
Tel: +251-11-515 6144
Fax: +251-11-550 8935
E-mail: elia@elia. org. et
ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT C OMMISSION
P. . Box 2313  Addis Ababa  Ethiopia
Fax: +251 11 551 4396