Ed
=

NE | C INVESTMENT
GUIDE
ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
PhAFCRP AhNterrr hell
| ag
TIMES: I
_
COMMISSIONER LELISE NEME
Dear esteemed investors,
Ethiopia as known by many as the land of origins, is endowed with a swathe of invest-
ment opportunities at all corners of the country. In the last decade, the country has
achieved a remarkable and fast economic growth. Home to the continent's second
largest population, the country has been attracting high amount of Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI} in recent years.
Backstopped by a profound economic strategy and policies, the Government has
been putting efforts to create a business environment that is conducive to investment
through development of various infrastructures,
Even though the country is positioned as a yet untapped investment opportunity in
Eastern Africa, its remarkable growth is amplified with various values and assets. The
Government has established infrastructures such as specialized industrial parks that
serve as a conducive microclimate to investments and are equipped with efficient and
effective services, healthcare center, commercial buildings, proper waste treatment
facilities, police stations, fire brigade and 24/7 security services.
With an overarching homegrown economic reform agenda which supports the fast
growth and puts the private sector at the heart of the economic development, the
country prioritized seven investment sectors i. e. , Textile & apparel, Leather & leather
products, Pharmaceuticals, Agro- processing, Tourism, ICT, Mining and Energy.
Tailored fiscal and non-fiscal incentives including customs, duties, and income tax
exemptions, guaranteed repatriation of funds, bonded export facilities and availability
of active and trainable labor which represents 60% of the total population offers great
investment opportunity.
Market access is also another opportunity the country offers for successful investments.
The strategic location of the country that serves as a spring off point to various African
countries, Europe and Asia, different trade agreements. Furthermore, equipped
with efficient logistical hub such as Air transport through the legendary Ethiopian
airlines, clean powered railway, suitable dry ports, well-connected express roads, and
highways provide expedited transportation services to investments.
As mandated and being an autonomous government institution, the Ethiopian In-
vestment commission (EIC) carries out efficient investment administration system to
attract foreign and domestic investments to Ethiopia through promotional, facilitation
and aftercare services.
C
O
N
T
E
5
Ethiopia at a Glance
Why Invest in Ethiopia
Investment Opportunities
Industry Parks Development
Investment Incentives
Investment Facilitation, Protection and Guarantee
Setting up Investment
Requirements to Obtain Investment Permit
Factors at a Glance
Laws & Regulations
Government Institutions Mandates
Client Charter
Useful Contacts
ETHIOPIA:
LAND OF
INVESTMENT
OPPORTUNITIES
#TIME TO INVESTINETF
SE] C2
\ COMMISSION
FATTR? A Throng
Invest in: Agriculture, Manufacturing
1. ETHIOPIA AT A GLANCE.
2. WHY INVEST IN ETHIOPIA?
POLITICAL SYSTEM 5 CAPITAL CITY
Caffee, oilseeds, goid, horticulture products, gold, pulses, live
animals, growing manufacturing export including textile &
appara, leather & leather products, and others.
126 billion USD (2022) & 1,212 respectively
Temperature in the highlands: 20' c-30'c, low in the highlands
Up to 45' , Rainfall ranges from 200mm to 2000 mm and
Highly suitable for production
1.1 million square kilometers
POPLILATI LANGUAG OTHER I
Horn of Africa, ot the mast population nation Warking Federal language Currency: Ethiopian birr
assraad between Africa, in africa [120 million] Amharic & English widely
the Middle East & Asia Spoken
With a vision of making Ethiopia a competitive and preferred investment destination
by creating productive economic cluster, the government is tirelessly working hard to
promote the investment opportunities of the country to attract quality foreign direct
investment (FDI) ever before.
Ethiopia's untapped investment potential makes the nation one of the ideal destinations
for several global brands and top businesspersons. The rapid development of the
country has also opened a plethora of opportunities for foreign investors, which can
be explored on this Investment Guide.
Being one of the fastest growing economies in the world, Ethiopia continued to be
among the top five FDI destinations in Africa and the biggest recipient in East Africa
due to its:
Government Commitment to Investment
* The Ethiopian government is committed to make the investment policy beneficial to the
country and the investors. The newly amended Investment Proclamation and Regulation have
been enacted as of 2020 to to enhance the role of the private sector in the economy & improve
issues regarding investment.
* The amened Regulation has changed the positive list approach into a negative list. The shift
towards a negative list is significant aspect of the new investment law because foreign investors
are now allowed to invest in any investment area except those that are expressly reserved.
* The government under the leadership of PM Abiy Ahmed (PHD) - unveiled a Homegrown
Economic Reform Agenda aimed at unlocking the countrys development potentials designed
to propel Ethiopia into becoming the African icon prosperity by 2030.
* Improving socio-economic governance with peace and security.
+ High level political commitment for investment promotion and protection; investment policy
making is led by the Ethiopian Investment Board chaired by the Prime Minister.
* Wide-ranging investment incentive packages for priority sectors and export-oriented
investments.
* Bold initiative in the development of state-of-the-art industrial parks, electric-powered railway
connecting the capital and other economic corridors to the port of Djibouti.
Conducive Economic Factors
= Ethiopia is still the fastest growing economy in the region with 6.4% growth in FY2020/21.
Over the past 15 years, the countrys economy has been among the fastest growing in the world
at an average of 9.5% per year (World Bank Report, 2022).
+ Ethiopia aimed to achieve a lower-middle status by 2030 and sustain its economic growth to
|
AM INVESTMENT GUIDE TO ETHIOPLA AELC
achieve medium-middle and higher-middle status by 2040 and 2050 respectively.
* The structural reforms designed to strengthen the private sector to drive growth and create
more jobs.
* Stable and conducive macroeconomic environment.
* The government has undertaken economic reforms including liberalization and privatization
of telecommunications and finance sectors.
Favorable Market Factors
* The FDI inflows to Ethiopia averaged $3.35 billion from 2015 to 2020. Moreover, in 2021 the
FD! inflows increased by 18% from the preceding years and jumped to $3.95 billion.
+ Africa's second most populous nation with a population size of 120 million.
 Over 60 million active labor force, trainable and available at competitive wage rate.
* Duty-free, quota-free access to EU markets through Everything but Arms (EBA). Preferential
market access to India, as well.
* Duty-free, quota-free access to Japan, Canada, China, Turkey, Australia, and New Zealand 
covering substantially all export goods from Ethiopia.
+ Ethiopia is a member of AfCFTA (African Continental Free Trade Area) which is very beneficial
for investors in terms of trade activities within African continent,
* Member of COMESA with preferential market access to a regional market of aver 400 million
people.
+ Strategic location with proximity to the Middle East, Europe, and Asia.
Improving Infrastructure
+ The newly built Addis-Djibouti electric-powered railway is fully operational.
 Ethiopian Airlines, the largest Aviation Group in Africa and member of Star Alliance, serves
more than 131 international and 23 local destinations as well as over 66 cargo flights.
* Huge investment potential in renewable energy including hydropower, solar, wind, geother-
mal and bioenergy. Hydropower makes up approximately 95% of Ethiopia's current installed
generation capacity.
* The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD), the largest hydroelectric power dam in Africa,
is on the verge of completion and expected to generate 6,450MW.
* In Ethiopia, the price of electricity is the cheapest in the world which is $0.028/KWh.
* Expanding telecommunication services. Safaricom, a leading African telecommunications
company, has recently invested in Ethiopia.
* Expansive road networks connecting national and regional markets.
* Ethiopia so far has constructed and put to work several state-of-the-art industrial parks across
the country.
There are numerous attractive investment opportunities in Ethiopia. Investors are
rewarded with different incentives based on their project and sector they prefer to
engage in. The investment opportunities, priority sectors and incentives are presented
as follows: -
Before going deep into the opportunities, it is important to point out areas where
investors are eligible to invest. Foreign investor(s) can engage in various investment
sectors according to the Ethiopian investment regulation No. 474/2020. Certain sec-
tors previously closed are now opened for foreign investors. In this regard, Telecom-
munications, Logistics & Transportation and Financial sectors are worth mentioned.
(Please refer the amened Ethiopian Investment Regulation No. 474/2020 from EIC
website: www. investethiopia. gov. et).
Priority Sectors Under the Home-grown
Economic Reform Eic Priority Sectors
( agrickure
Tier 1 Leather & Leather products
= Agro-processing
Manufacturing
Pharmaceuticals
Tourism |
AGRICULTURE
Ethiopia is endowed with abundant agricultural resources
and has diverse agro-ecological zones. The country is Afri-
cas leading producer of organic coffee; the second largest
flower exporting country in Africa and the fourth in the world
as well as regional lead in honey and beeswax production.
The agriculture sector accounts for 47% of the GDP, 80%
of exports, and absorbed 83% of the countrys workforce.
Agriculture is one of the best prospect investment areas.
Opportunities for investing on agriculture include but not
limited to:
Cereal and Oilseeds
Ethiopia produces mainly a variety of cereals, pulses, oil-
seeds, and other industrial crops. Of the total area, 75 min
ha is suitable for annual and perennial crop production.
* The irrigation potential of the country is estimated to be around
4.3 min ha.
* Ranked 9th top producer of sesame globally. Niger seed, ground
nuts, linseed and soybeans are the top five products by volume.
+ Over 204,000 ha of land suitable for sesame production.
Dairy Farm
Ethiopia has the largest inventory of livestock in Africa, and a
relatively favorable climate for improved, high yielding dairy
cattle breeds. Over the past 17 years, volume of cow milk
production increased modestly from 1 billion to 4 billion
liters. There is 2.5mn ha of suitable land for dairy production
and three public ranches that are soon to be privatized.
ESTMENT GUIDE TO ETHIOPIA AEIC
Poultry
Ethiopia ranked 9th in chicken population in Africa. Despite
its potential, the average per capita poultry consumption of
the nation is 0.5k. It is significantly lower than the Sub-Sa-
haran Africa average of 2.3 kg. Imports of chicken meat in-
creased by nearly 60% in a period of 10 years and risen
by 32% between 2008-2013. There is a shortage of day-old
chick (DOC) supply.
In addition, foreigners can invest and do lucrative business
in the horticulture development, coffee and tea plantation,
cotton plantation, animal feed, livestock, fishery, sugarcane
plantation, palm tree and rubber tree plantation, apiculture,
and other agricultural investment areas.
MANUFACTURING
Ethiopia is Africa's largest raw material supplier for the textile
and leather industries. The country offers a remarkable com-
petitive advantage for the manufacturing industries due to:
 Government facilitation of efficiency-enhancing investment solu-
tions including modern industrial parks that are ready for plug
and play,
+ Large pool of young and trainable work force available at com-
petitive wages,
* Cheapest energy rate on a global standard,
* Geographic proximity and preferential access to key markets, and
+ Abundance of high-quality industrial raw materials.
A TLY PWR TR
Textile and Garment
The textile & garment sector in Ethiopia has been growing in the past decades. There
is access to major markets in the local and international market. USA & UK are the
major export destinations for the products.
Opportunities for Private Sector:
The major investment opportunities on this sector includes commercial cotton pro-
duction, spinning, weaving and garment.
Textile manufacturing: Manufacturers producing any cloth or goods prepared by weaving,
knitting, or felting.
Garment manufacturing: Manufactures producing any article of clothing such as dresses,
suits, shirts, trousers, ready-made prepared from textile/ fabric.
Components and Trim manufacturing: Manufacturers producing materials used as compo-
nents & decorations of garments such zippers, buttons, plastics, threads, elastics, carton boxes,
poly bags, hangers, printing, etc.
Leather and Leather Products
Ethiopia's livestock population ranks first in Africa and sixth in the world (61 min
heads of cattle, 32 mln heads of sheep and 31min heads of goats). The leather in-
dustry bases itself on the countrys livestock resources. This enormous population of
livestock provides ample opportunity in the value chain starting from tanning of hides
and skins all the way up to the finished leather products. Manufacturing companies
can supply major markets in the world including Italy, USA, & Germany.
Opportunities for Private Sector Includes:
* Tanning of hides and skins.
* Chemical inputs manufacturing for tannery use.
* Footwear, gloves, and other leather goods manufacturing.
* Accessories: soles, synthetic sewing thread, plastic linen, shoelaces, zippers, buckle.
AN INVESTMENT GUIDE TO ETHIOPIA AEIC
One of the fastest growing industries in Ethiopia with an annual growth rate of 15%.
Currently, the market is estimated to be around one billion USD, of which over 80%
is met by imported products that are mainly procured by the Government, Ethiopia
is the first African countries to have developed a strategy for the pharmaceuticals
industry.
Favorable Conditions for Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
* Kilinto Industrial Park, designated for the pharmaceutical industry, is well-equipped with mod-
ern infrastructure,
It is one of the priority investment areas.
* High and growing domestic and regional markets. The African pharma market is valued to be
over $20 Billion.
* Aftractive investment incentives such as corporate income tax exemptions up to 14 years
depending on product type and export performance.
* Long-term Government procurement guarantee, 25% price preference and 30% advance pay-
ment to the suppliers,
Trainable workforce with several pharmacy schools. Competitive infrastructure including Ethi-
opian Airlines and a railway connecting Kilinto Industrial Park to Djibouti port.
Potential
* Ethiopia is a continental and global leader in the production of a variety of raw materials
needed for agro-processing:
+ 5th largest producer of tropical fruits in Africa.
+ 3rd biggest producer of wheat in Africa.
* 6th leading producer of livestock population globally.
* 9th in chicken population in Africa
Fruit Juice
* Ethiopia has favorable agro-ecological climate condition.
* Most of the land available for growing tropical fruit is suitable for organic.
+ Arba Minch, Upper Awash valley and Assosa are high potential areas for year-round.
* With basic irrigation, a new producer can increase yields dramatically.
Edible Oil
Ethiopia has abundant resources suitable
for oilseeds production. Despite its poten-
tial, there is limited domestic processing
of edible oil (5% of supply) and increasing
local demand, resulting in significant im-
ports of edible oil covering 95% of supply
consisting mainly palm oil.
The nation is among the top 20 oilseeds
producers in Africa, with majority of ex-
ports still being in raw form, with no value
addition.
Horticulture Industry
Ethiopia has a comparative advantage for
the cultivation of horticultural products
due to its favorable climate, vast water
resource, competitive labor cost and ac-
cess to regional and international markets
to its proximity especially to European
and Middle East countries. This makes the
country more favorable for investors in the
industry
Floriculture
The major part of the horticulture indus-
try is created by investments in the flori-
culture sector. Ethiopia is the 2nd largest
producer of cut flowers in Africa and the
4th in the world after the Netherlands,
Colombia, Ecuador and Kenya. Cut flow-
ers, gypsophila, hypericum, limonium,
chrysanthemum, carnations, static and
pot plants are widely cultivated in various
agroecology.
Fruit, Vegetables and Herbs
Ethiopias diversified agro-climatic condi-
tion also makes it suitable for the produc-
tion of a broad range of fruit, vegetables
and herbs. The main vegetables include
snow peas, broccoli, courgettes, okra, as-
paragus, cherry, tomatoes, green chillies,
fresh chives, parsley, rosemary, dill, basil,
roccola, potatoes, cabbages, cauliflower,
eggplant, celery, cucumber, pepper, on-
ion, carrots and green beans.
The various types of fruit such as citrus,
banana, mango, papaya, avocado, gua-
va, grapes, pineapple, passion fruit, water
melon, sweet melon apples and strawber-
ries are also widely cultivated. Further-
more, the major export herbs from Ethi-
opia includes chives, basil and rosemary.
Bamboo for Green Investment
Ethiopia has the largest resource of bam-
boo in Africa, with an estimated 1.47 mil-
lion ha of two indigenous bamboo species
in most regional states.
Bamboo has a huge potential to contrib-
ute to the development of Ethiopia's green
economy. Opportunities for investing on
bamboo mainly include:
* Bamboo timber substitute industries (parquet
floor, MDF and OSB boards, lumber and
panels, mat ply boards, plastic composite
products);
* Construction, pulp & paper; bio-energy,
eco-tourism, carbon credit plantation and
others.
AN INVESTMENT GUIDE TO ETHIOPIA Al I
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
Ethiopian and Kenyan leaders open industrial park
ter, @CGTN on Facebook, YouTube, Weibo, Wechat, Tumblr and Google+. For more news, download CGTN APP, and follow @
WORLD (
INTEGRATED AGRO INDUSTRIAL PARKS
The government has put in place integrated agro industrial parks (IAIPs) in various regions of the country. The purpose of 1AIPs
is to attract the private sector to set up food processing plants in areas of high agricultural production and thereby locally, add
value to agricultural produce, link farmers to processing plants, reduce post-harvest losses, create jobs and drive rural economic
growth in Ethiopia.
* The IAIPs employ a holistic approach for input supply, on-farm production, backward market linkages and raw material sourcing to ensure
sustainability and efficiency.
 Just to mention, Bulbula Integrated Agro-Industrial Park, Bure Integrated Agro-Industrial Park, and Yirgalem Integrated Agro-Industrial Park have
become operational. Baeker Integrated Agro-Industrial Park is also in the pipeline.
=Thio
LAND OF ORIGINS
pla
TOURISM
Known as Land of Origins, Ethiopia is among the worlds best destination for tourism. The country is a land of rugged
mountains, broad savannah, lakes and rivers. With 14 major wildlife reserves, Ethiopia provides a microcosm of the entire
sub-Saharan ecosystem. Its unique Rift Valley is also a remarkable region of volcanic lakes, with their famous collections of
birdlife, great escarpments and stunning vistas.
As the land where mankind, coffee and the Blue Nile trace their roots, Ethiopia has always been a fascinating destination for
holidaymakers. The timeless charm of Ethiopias natural, cultural and historical tourist attractions has been driving an influx
of tourists from far and wide.
Ethiopia is amongst the countries that have registered their tangible and intangible heritages under UNESCO cultural
heritage list. So far, UNESCO has recognized 13 heritages (nine tangible & four intangible). The nine tangible heritages
tered by UNISCO are:
Semen National Park, natural site Lalibela Rock Hewn Churchs Fasil Ghebbi (Castles),
registered in 1978. registered in 1978. registered in 1978.
Lower Omo Valley Aksum Obelisk, Lower Awash Valley
registered in 1980. registered in 1980 registered in 1980
m9
Tiya Archaeological site
Harar Jugo
(Fortified City)
AN INVESTMENT GUIDE TO ETHIOPIA AE IC
Konso Cultural Landscape
Opportunities
Star designated hotels, lodges, and restaurants.
* Eco-lodge camp
* Boat transportation
* Hot-air ballooning
 Sky-cable car
* Lake side resorts
Incentives for Tourism
* Duty free privileges on finishing construction materials (if investors build the hotel themselves).
* Duty free import of the following vehicles. (Source: Vehicle Incentives Directive, 2013)
A bus (minimum capacity of 30 passengers excluding the foldable sits)
= 5 years of income tax exemption for those who invest on the five specified regions. (Source:
Ethiopian Investment Board Directive, 2017 & Investment Incentive 517/2022)
I. Bale and Semen Mountain national parks
II. Rift valley lakes (Abyata Shalla and Abaya Chamo)
Il. Guralta Mountains (Wekro, Hawzen and Adigrat}
IV. Erta Ale (Dalol, Hadar, Afdera and Asela lakes)
V. Wonchi Crater Lake and afro alepine forest and other related tourist attraction sites.
MINING
* Ethiopia has a wide variety of untapped mineral resources and offers opportunities in upstream
and downstream operations.
* Ethiopia is the only producer of opal in Africa, major gold exporter and emerging country for
oil and natural gas exploration.
* Mining potentials: gold, potash, platinum, opal, iron, tantalum, marble, granite, limestone, etc.
AN INVESTMENT GUIDE TO ETHIOPIA AE 15
Incentives
* Lower corporate income tax rate of 25% for large- scale mining projects
* Loss carry forward for 10 years.
+ Accelerated depreciation on straight line basis over useful life of four years.
* Customs duty and other tax-free import of equipment, machinery, vehicles, and consumables.
Attractive Royalties
* 7% Precious minerals
* 6% Semi-precious minerals
* 4% for industrial minerals
+ 5% for metallic minerals
* 7% for gold
* 3% Construction minerals
+ Petroleum royalties are negotiable.
ENERGY
Ethiopia is well known as a water tower of Africa. Thus, there are many investment
opportunities on the energy sector. The government offers attractive incentives for
investors who wish to engage in the sector.
Ethiopian government has also assigned one independent organization, Ministry of
Water and Energy (MoWE), to manage this the sector. MoWE is the lead institution for
the Energy sector oversees three supervised institutions.
MA 11
PTs
Ethiopian Energy Authority
Ethiopian Electric Power (EEP)- has the responsibility to generate, transmit and
wholesale power.
Ethiopian Electric Utility (EEU)  has the responsibility to distribute and sale in retail.
Ethiopian Energy Authority (EEA)-regulatory body for Energy and energy efficiency.
Investor(s) can engage in the following activities including power from the following
sources:
* Hydro power,
* Solar,
* Wind,
* Geothermal, and
* Bioenergy.
+ Ethiopia is endowed with various energy resources. These mainly include hydropower, geo-
thermal, solar and wind.
* Huge hydropower potential estimated up to 45,000 MW,
+ 1,350,000 MW potential from wind energy,
* Upto 10,000 MW patential from geothermal,
* Solar irradiation ranges from 4.5 kWh/m2/day to 7.5 kWh/m2/day,
* (enerating power from waste geothermal is also a potential bioenergy resources accumulated
in cities and towns.
* An investor engaged in power generation and supply of electricity shall be entitled to a tax
holiday from 4-5 years depending on the region where the investment will be made.
INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT)
As the government of Ethiopia focuses on building an inclusive digital economy, the
ICT Park was built to provide impetus for the development of the countrys ICT sector
by providing a world-class business environment for technology-related companies.
ICT sector plays an important role in creating an enabling environment for creative
industries and innovation.
Opportunities:
Telecommunications service,
Software, application and database development,
System integration and data center services,
ICT enabled service,
Manufacturing of ICT equipment, and
E-commerce and ICT infrastructure
TMENT GUIDE TO ETHIC
4. INDUSTRY PARK DEVELOPMENT
With a view to accelerating the economic transformation and development of the country through the establishment of Industrial Parks in strategic locations, the government has invested
a huge amount of money for the development of industrial parks across the nation.
Both foreign and domestic companies have an opportunity of investing as industrial park (IP) developer or as industrial park (IP) operator.
pp
n
-
: Jl {
SE TEE. No
2 Ce Sas tll wile io 3h
OPERATIO
AL INDUSTRIAL PARKS IN ETHIOPIA
Location: Sidama Region
Distance: 271 km from Addis Ababa, 718 km from port of Djibouti
Specialization: Textile and Apparel
Area: 2,140 ha
Location: Addis Ababa
Distance: 892 km from port of Djibouti
Specialization: Textile and Leather
Area: 172 ha
Distance: 890 km from port of Djibouti
Specialization: ICT and ICT enabling service
Area: 280 ha
Location: Dire Dawa City Administration
Distance: 520 km from Addis Ababa, 321 km from port of Djibouti
Specialization: Free Trade
Area: 150 ha
Location: Amhara Region
Distance: 367 km from Addis Ababa, 375 km from port of Djibouti
Area: 75 ha
Location: Oromia Region
Distance: 64 km from Addis Ababa, 828 km from port of Djibouti
Specialization: Tannery, Leather products and Textile
Area: 80 ha
Distance: 92 km from Addis Ababa, 791 km from port of Djibouti
Area: 365 ha
Distance: 414 km from Addis Ababa, 670 km from port of Djibouti
Specialization: Agro-processing Industry
Distance: 30 km from Addis Ababa, 862 km from port of Djibouti
Specialization: Mixed
Area: 233 ha
Distance: 131 km from Addis Ababa, 808 km from port of Djibouti
Area: 100 ha
Distance: 348 km from Addis Ababa, 1,167 km from port of Djibouti
Specialization: Textile, Leather and Agro-processing
Distance: 552 km from Addis Ababa, 907 km from port of Djibouti
Location: Addis Ababa ]
Specialization: Pharmaceuticals
Distance: 310 km from Addis Ababa, 758 km from port of Djibouti
Area: 176 ha
Area: 181 ha
Location: Afar Region
Distance: 564 km from Addis Ababa, 306 km from port of Djibouti
Area: 138 ha
Distance: 184 km from Addis Ababa, 940 km from port of Djibouti
Area: 271 ha
Location: Tigray Region
Distance; 772 km from Addis Ababa, 777 km from port of Djibouti
Area: 8.7 ha
Distance: 130 km from Addis Ababa, 790 km from port of Djibouti
Specialization: Construction Materials
Specialization: Leather and Leather products
Area: 116 ha
Distance: 35 km from Addis Ababa, 927 km from port of Djibouti
Specialization: Metal Works
Distance: 772 km from Addis Ababa, 7 km from part of Djibouti
Specialization: Apparel and garment
Distance: 40 km from Addis Ababa, 832 km from port of Djibouti
OMING INDUST
Specialization: Textile
Area: 50 ha
Distance: 970 km from Addis Ababa, 977 km from port of Djibouti
Area: 258 ha
Area: 1,000 ha
Area: 167 ha
The Industrial Park development is anchored on the principles of:
* Specialized parks: enhancing economy of scale and efficiency through the development of
sector-specific specialized industrial parks.
* Export promotion: government provision of industrial park incentives targeted at increased
export performance and competitiveness.
Sustainability: maintaining high environmental standards through the use of renewable en-
ergy and zero liquid discharge (ZLD) technology; assuring social sustainability and local link-
Ages.
+ Vertical integration: enhancing forward and backward linkages in the economy; and
 Skills development and competitiveness: developing employees skills for enterprise pro-
ductivity and competitiveness.
* 10-15 years income tax exemption for development of industrial parks depending on park
location (10 years in Addis Ababa or the surrounding special zones of Oromia, 15 years in
other areas).
* 60-80 years land lease right at promotional rate; with sub- lease right.
 Reliable electricity at globally competitive rate- government avails dedicated power substation
for industrial parks.
FREE b
REE
FREE TRADE ZONE
The African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA} is one of the Flagship Projects of
Agenda 2063 Africa's development framework. The AfCFTA aims at accelerating in-
tra-African trade and boosting the continent's trading position in the global market.
Ethiopia is one of the African countries that has ratified the AfCFTA and this is an
encouraging step for the country towards realizing the benefits of integration with
the global economy. Based on this, the country launched its first Free Trade Zone
in 2022 in Dire Dawa and great efforts are made to further expand the FTZ in other
regions. Dire Dawa Free Trade Zone, 450 km east of the capital Addis Ababa and 320
km south-west of Djibouti port, is expected to benefit Ethiopia's entire economy by
increasing the countrys import and export trade.
Among the contributions this Free Trade Zone is expected to give are:
+ Integrating Dire Dawa Industrial Park and dry port with various service-providing in-
stitutions
* Reducing logistics time and cost
+ Boosting trade competitiveness and efficiency
* Increasing foreign trade and FDI flow
+ Creating a wide range of employment opportunities
* Facilitating the transfer of knowledge
* Increasing pace of urbanization and industrialization, and
* Reducing the cost of domestic commodity prices and stabilizing the inflation rate.
i
ro
ul
AN INVESTMENT GUIDE TO ETHIOPTA AELC
Priority sectors identified in this Investment Guide and other sub-sectors mentioned
in the investment regulation have attractive incentives are listed below:
Fiscal Investment Incentives
1. Corporate Income Tax Exemption:
* Exemption from corporate income tax up to 10 years depending on the sector engagements.
* Additional 2-4 years exemption for industrial park enterprises with at least 80% export or input
supply to exporters.
+ Additional 30% deduction for three consecutive years if investment in underdeveloped re-
gions,
* Exemption from income tax up to 15 years for Industry Park developers.
2. Import Exemption:
* Capital goods: 100% exemption from duties and other taxes on imports of capital goods
(machinery & equipment}.
* Construction materials: Full exemption from duties and other taxes on imports of construc-
tion & finishing materials (for investors who construct their own factory).
* Spare parts: with a value up to 15% of the total value of capital goods {100% of total value of
capital goods for industrial park enterprises that are fully exporters).
+ Vehicles: Duty-free importation of delivery vans and trucks will be implemented according
to the Vehicles Directive.
3. Export Incentives: Companies that produce their products in Ethiopia and
export have the following incentives:
 Full export duty exemption.
e Full import duty exemption on raw materials needed to produce export commodities.
* Additional two years exemption for 60% exporters or input suppliers to exporters within or
outside of industrial parks:
4. Loss Carry Forward: A right to carry for after the base income tax exemption
period expires.
Non-Fiscal Incentives
+ Customs facilitation through bonded export factory and similar other schemes.
* Guarantee against expropriation.
+ Guarantee for repatriation of funds.
MA 18
Relaxed industrial park land regime 60-80 years charge- free lease for IP developers.
Discounted lease rate for IP enterprises.
Other Incentives
Personal effects for residents in industrial parks.
Investors buying above items from the local market can seek fund of the duty paid.
Export duty exemption on all products except semi- processed hides and skins.
Loss carries forward- a right to carry forward loss incurred within the period of income tax
exemption for half of the income tax exemption period after expiry, maximum being 5 years.
The newly amended Investment Incentive Regulation No. 517/2022 provides incentives for
Information & Communications Technology and Logistics Service investment sectors.
Facilitation
.
One-stop shop and aftercare services under EIC (head office and industrial park branches).
Customs facilitation through bonded warehouse and voucher schemes.
Expedited visa procedure- expedited procedure of securing entry, work permit and certificate
of residency.
Online visa and multiple visa services.
Online investment application services.
The right to own immovable property as per investment needs.
The right to open and operate foreign currency accounts.
The right to employ expatriate managers and experts,
Protection and Guarantee
Ethiopia has signed over 30 Bilateral Investment Treaties including China, Germany, France,
Turkey, Italy, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Netherlands, Sweden, Austria, Israel, Swiss, Kuwait,
Algeria, Egypt, and Sudan as well as several Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements that pro-
vide investors with utmost protection.
The protection of intellectual property rights which include trademarks, certification and col-
lective marks.
The right to own a dwelling house when investing a minimum of 10,000,000 USD.
The country is also a member of the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) and the
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).
Guarantee for repatriation of profits, dividends and other funds.
Constitutional guarantee to property rights.
Ranked 67/190 economies for ease of enforcing commercial contracts-rating of OECD stan-
dard (World banks Doing Business Report, 2020).
* The right to open and operate foreign currency accounts.
* The right to employ expatriate managers and experts.
Foreign investor(s) can be engaged in the following investment types:
A. Greenfield Investments: Ethiopian investment Commission will give an in-
vestment license for greenfield investments made by foreign investor(s) & joint in-
vestments made between foreign investor(s) & local investor(s). A foreign company or
investor can form the business as a:
* Sole Proprietorship: an individual is the owner of the company.
+ Private Limited Company: A new company formed by two or more shareholders. The share-
holders can be:
. Two or more companies
. Company({s} and a person(s)
. Two or more individuals (The documentation will be the same as the sole proprietorship
company registration).
+ Branch Company: Existing foreign company can open a branch company in Ethiopia.
B. Brownfield Investments
According to the investment regulation no. 474/2020, foreign investor(s) interested to
buy an existing enterprise or shares should seek approval from Ethiopian Investment
Commission.
The initial step is to acquire investment permit from EIC. The requirements and proce-
dures are explained in detail in the following pages.
The initial step for foreign investor(s) to form a company in Ethiopia is to get an in-
vestment permit from EIC, Investor(s) can apply for an investment permit in person at
EIC HQ or online via this link: www. invest-ethiopia. com. In doing so, the investor(s}
must comply with the requirements.
Sectorial Opening
The existing suitable economic development policy of the country, government's
special attention to the investment sectors, competitive and trainable labor force are
among the major factors that enabled the country to become successful in attracting
FDI.
Some important sectors which were previously closed are now opened for foreign
investors. The investors can engage in several investment activities based on the
Investment Proclamation No. 1180/2020 and Regulation No. 474/2020 (except few
sectors reserved for domestic investors others are open for foreign investors).
The requirements to obtain investment permit for foreign investor(s) are
capital and documents.
A. Minimum Capital Requirement
According to the Investment Proclamation No. 1180/2020, the minimum capital
requirement and legal terms for foreign investors to engage in various investment
activities is stated below:
+ Investor(s) are expected to deposit the minimum requirement in cash after document approval
and registration at the EIC.
* Foreign investor re-investing their profits or dividends generated from existing enterprise in
Ethiopia may not be expected to deposit the minimum requirement mentioned in the above
table.
MINIMUM CAPITAL REQUIREMENT
100% Joint venture with
Type of the sector foreign investor(s) local investor(s)
For investment
areas allowed un-
der the investment
proclamation
USD 200,000 USD 150,000
Architectural,
engineering works
or related techni-
cal consultancy
services, technical
testing & analysis or
in publishing works
USD 100,000 uUsD 50,000
B. Document Requirements
Foreign investor(s) are expected to submit the following documents to get approval for
their investment projects from EIC.
The document requirements for each type of company formation is listed separately
in the following table.
MA 20
DOCUMENT REQUIREMENTS
+ Filled Application Form
Sole Proprietorship + Existing Company Profile
* Investment Visa & Passport copy
 Filled Application Form
* Existing Company Profile
Private Limited * Parent Company documents authenticated in
Company Ethiopian embassy abroad, Ministry of Affairs &
local authentication office (if the shareholder/s are
companies)
* Draft of Memorandum of Association for the
proposed company
* Filled Application Form
* Authenticated Parent Company documents
(Memorandum of Association, Certificate of
Branch company Incorporation, Minutes of Resolution)
* Power of Attorney, Investment Visa of the General
Manager
N. B.
Application forms and draft MoA mentioned in the table can be found online from EICs web-
site: www. investethiopia. gov. et
Investment Visa (IV) is required for foreign investors
Visa applications can be obtained online via e-visa website: www. evisa. gov. et or in person at
Ethiopia's Diplomatic Missions overseas.
The Immigration and Citizenship Service (ICS) issues a residence permit to a foreign investor up
on submission of an investment permit issued in his/ her name.
A foreign investor who is a shareholder of a company or branch company as well as expatriate
personnel who have wark permit are entitled to get residence permit.
Favorable visa terms for investors in industrial parks: Multiple entry visa valid for up to five years
is given for foreign investors; up to three years long visa for industrial park service providers,
managers, board members and senior experts employed by foreign investors.
REGISTRATION AND LICENSING PROCESSES AT EIC
1 Submit the following documents
to EIC for approval
Filled application Form, existing Company Profile &
Sole Proprietorship Ise Vid
Filled application Form, existing Company Profile
and,
If the shareholders are individuals= Investment Visa,
PLC If the shareholders are companies= notarized
parent Company documents including Certificate of
Incorporation, Minutes of Resolution, Memorandum
of Association & Power of Attorney
Branch company Authenticate parent Company documents including Certifi-
cate of Incorporation, Minutes of Resolution, Memorandum
and Article of Association.
Power of Attorney, Passport and Investment Visa of the
General Manager
After approval from EIC
2 Only for PLC
* Check uniqueness of the Company Name at EIC
 Edit, sign & authenticate Memorandum of Association of
the new Company at EIC.
Collect a supporting letter from EIC to open a foreign & local bank account
Transfer / deposit the required minimum capital in cash
Submit authenticated office lease agreement & TIN certificate (ONLY for PLC)
[=u NW; BS VE
Submit confirmation letter to EIC & get the Investment Permit Certificate.
+ All the mentioned documents in step 1 should be authenticated by Ethiopian em-
bassy abroad,
Ministry of Affairs & local authentication office
* The average time to get an investment permit is from 3 to 5 business/working days.
EIC offers one-stop service for the above activities and the cost is very
minimal.
AN INVESTMENT GUIDE To ETHIOPIA AEIL
Industry Park Registration Process
Investors planning to develop an industrial park or make other forms of investment
within industrial parks will have to go through different steps:
IP Developer: means any profit-making public, public-private or private developer
including the corporation engaged in designing, constructing, or developing indus-
trial parks in accordance with investment proclamation & investment regulations,
industrial park developer permit and industrial park developer agreement.
Steps:
1. Application to EIC
2. Approval by the Ethiopian Investment Board
3. Sign an MoU with EIC
4. Registration and licensing at EIC
IP operator: means any profit-making enterprise that operates, maintains or pro-
motes industrial park in accordance with the Investment Proclamation and Regula-
tion, the industrial park operator permits and industrial park operator agreement and,
includes the Corporation.
2. Sign a tripartite MoU with IP developer & EIC
3. Registration & licensing at EIC
4. Sign operations management agreement with IP developer
IP Enterprise/Tenant: means a public, private or public-private enterprise owned by
Ethiopians, foreigners or jointly and possess developed land under the industrial park
through sub- lease or by renting or building a factory within the industrial park to en-
gage in manufacturing activity or in-service provision for profit making in accordance
with Investment Proclamation and Regulation, industrial park enterprise permit and
industrial park enterprise agreement.
2. Sign an MoU with EIC
3. Deposit commitment fee of USD 200,000 in IP Developer's account: to be ac-
counted as part of initial capital or licensing
5. Shed rental/sub-lease agreement with IP developer
6. Handover by IP developer
For further information regarding industry park, refer the industrial park proclamation
No. 886/2015.
A 21
Aftercare Services:
After acquiring an investment permit, the good hand of EIC will follow you as you lay
the ground for your operation. The EIC provides post-establishment facilitation and fol-
low-up services including, but not limited to:
* Facilitating acquisition of land and loan processing
* Facilitating power supply and other important utilities.
EIC has been also launched an aftercare strategy aiming to facilitate the investors:
+ Remain operate their investment/ business smoothly in the country through retention.
+ To expand their existing investments, and
 Re-invest their profit from their existing business & investments.
Ethiopia offers a favorable business-operating environment. The following provides an
insight and a sense of the excellent available opportunities.
Land
Land is available for investment on leasehold and rental basis. Investor(s) can engage
either in industrial parks or outside. Industrial parks are governed by the federal gov-
ernment (EIC & Industrial Parks Development Corporation}. In the case of land outside
industrial parks, each regional government authority has the authority to give land for
investments,
* Land Cost: each region and industrial parks have different rate. Please refer to the factor cost
document on EIC's website: (www. . theiguides. arg/ethi
* The government reserves dedicated land for commercial farming of cotton, horticulture de-
velopment and other sectors.
* Lease right is given for up to 80 years (depending on location and sector of engagement).
+ Industrial Park enterprises have the option of sub-leasing developed land to construct own
production facility in industrial parks {they can also rent or buy factory sheds).
Labor
* Ethiopia has a growing educated labor force. Over 50 universities with around half million stu-
dent population: Over 1,300 technical and vocational education and Training (TVET) institutes
with and annual intake close to one million students.
* Globally competitive wage rate.
* Government-supported provision of skills trainings through industry development institutes
+ Flexible domestic labor laws and regulations:
A 22
1. No minimum wage requirement on private sector employers
2. Normal working hours per day is 8 (excluding breaks for lunch)
3. Maximum number of working days per week is 6 (288 days per year)
4. No general restriction on night works
5. The number of paid annual leave days for a starting employee 14; slight increment for
additional years of services.
Infrastructure
* GERD, the largest hydroelectric power dam in Africa, is on the verge of completion and expected
to generate 6,450 MW electricity.
* The electricity rate is presented below:
Rates
1 General Tariff Flat Rate 1.7611
2 Low Voltage Industry Tariff (Flat rate) 1.2927
3 Medium Voltage Industry Tariff-15Kv & 33 KV 0.9969
(Flat rate)
4 High Voltage Industry Tariff (Flat rate) 0.7911
TRANSPORT
- - =
" ] '
RE iL aC 4
 = -] . ' fg
Air Transport
Ethiopian Airlines, is the flag carrier of Ethiopia, a world-class and Star Alliance member serves more than 131 international and 23 local destinations as well as over 66 cargo flights, The
airlines has promotional rate for export products. Addis Ababa Bole International Airport serves as a regional base for other airlines such as KLM, Lufthansa, Emirates, Qatar, and Turkish
Airlines.
A 23
Road
* International highways connecting Fthiopia with neighboring
countries.
+ A complex network of developed roads connecting major cit-
ies, towns and industrial parks, which are ideal for business.
Railway
* Over 30kms Addis Ababa light rail-fully operational, with the
capacity of 80,000 passengers/hour-first of its kind in sub-5a-
haran Africa.
+ More than 750kms, Addis Ababa Djibouti electric rail-
* way route completed-set to significantly reduce the time and
cost of inland transport for import/export items.
* Several other rail-way lines under construction which connects
all major economic corridors in Ethiopia.
Sea
* Reliable coastal and international marine and inland water
transport services from the Ethiopian Shipping and Logistics
Services Enterprise (ESLSE)
* that reaches to 260 destination ports. Promotional rate for the
manufacturing sector.
* Approximate distance from the center-910kms to port of Dji-
bouti (gate for a lions share of import/export), 964kms port of
Barbara, 1881kms to port Sudan and 2077kms to port Mom-
basa.
Finance
* Mare than 25 banks and insurance companies are available.
* The Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE) provides preferential
loan for export-oriented investments.
= Foreign investors can open a foreign account through approval
from the National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE)L
* Lease and project financing scheme are available.
= Foreign investors can access foreign loan
Tax Rates
0-35% Tax on income derived from employment
30% Taxable income from business
3% Withholding tax on goods imported for commercial use
10% Dividend tax on profits distributed to shareholders
5% Tax on royalty income
506 Tax on interest income from savings in local financial
institutions
15% Value added tax on imported items that are note exempt-
ed by law
0-35% Custom duty on imported items
0-100% Excise tax on selected import items defined by law (items
Gi considered luxurious, hazardous to health etc)
2-20% Turnover tax on supply of goods or rendering of ser-
vices.
Ethiopia follows a civil law legal system where major laws are codified under civ-
il, commercial, penal, and other codes. The constitution is the supreme law of the
country, under the constitution are proclamations that are passed by the parliament,
followed by regulations that are enacted by the Council of Ministers, and implement-
ing directives passed by Ministries or Agencies, all proclamations and regulations
are published in official Gazettes. Below is the most relevant legislation as related
to investment.
Investment Laws:
* Investment Proclamation No 1180/2020 Investment.
* Regulation No. 474/2020.
* Investment Directives- Directive on Duty-free import of Motor Vehicles No. 4/2005 (E. C).
* Investment Incentive Regulation No. 517/2022.
+ A Directive to Provide for the Application of Tax Incentives for Expansion/ Upgrading of In-
vestment No. 941/2023.
+ A Directive to provide for the Type & Quality of Vehicles allowed to be Imported Duty Free for
Dev't Projects No. 942/2023.
A 25
Industrial Park Laws:
* Proclamation No. 886/2015
* Industrial Parks Regulation, No. 417/2017
Commercial Matters:
* Commercial Code No. 1242/2021
* Commercial Registration and Business Licensing Amendment Proclamation No. 1150/2019
* Trade Practices and Consumer Protection Proclamation No. 813/2013
* Civil Code No.165/1960 Amended Proclamation No. 6839/2009.
Tax Laws:
* Income Tax Proclamation No. 979/2016
* Tax Administration Proclamation No. 983/2016
* Value Added Tax Proclamation No. 1157/2019
* VAT Regulation No. 79/2002
* Excise Tax Proclamation No. 1186/2020
Labor Law:
* Labor Proclamation No. 1156/2019.
Customs Laws:
* Customs Amendment Proclamation No. 1160/2019
* Export Trade Duty Incentive Schemes Proclamation No. 7686/2012
Ethiopian Customs Guide, Ethiopian Revenues and Customs Authority, March 2017
Intellectual Property:
+ Copyright and Neighboring Rights Protection Proclamation No. 410/2004, Amendment Proc-
lamation 872/2014.
* Trademark Registration and Protection Proclamation No. 501/2006
 Trademark Registration and Protection Regulation No. 273/2012
* Inventions, Minor Inventions, and Industrial Designs Regulation No. 12/1997
Mh 26
Environmental Laws:
+ Environmental Impact Assessment Proclamation No. 299/2002
* Environmental Pollution Control Proclamation No. 300/2002 Environmental laws:
Land Laws
* Land lease proclamation No. 721/2011
Foreign Exchange Laws:
* Transparency in Foreign Currency Allocation and Foreign Exchange
+ Management Directive No. FXD/45/2016, Amendment Directive No FXD/M46/2017
 Banking Business (Amendment) Proclamation No. 1159/2019
* Establishment and Operation of Foreign Currency Saving Account for Residents of Ethiopia,
Non-Resident Ethiopian and Non- Resident Ethiopian Origin Directive NO. FXD/68 72020
* Directives No. FXD/48/2017 directive for amended of retention and utilization of export earn-
ings and inward remittance directive No, 11/1998.
* Directives No. FXD/49/2017 limits on the birr and foreign currency holding in the territory of
Ethiopia.
1. Ethiopian Investment Board
* Chaired by the Prime Minster; members are composed of relevant Minsters,
+ Makes high-level decision on investment policy issues.
* Supervises investment promotion and facilitation activities.
2. Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC)
Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) is an autonomous government institution ac-
countable to the countrys Investment Board, which is chaired by the Prime Minister.
A Commissioner, who is also member of the Board, heads the EIC.
The EIC has restructured itself recently with a view to providing effective and efficient
service to investors and attracting more FDI.
The main services provided by EIC include:
Promoting the countrys investment opportunities and climate to foreign and domestic inves-
tors;
Providing one-stop services including issuances of Investment Permits, Business Licenses and
renewals as well as Construction Permits for Industrial Parks;
Notarizing Memorandum of Association and its amendments; Issuing Commercial Registration
Certificates, amendments, replacements, or cancellations;
Effecting registration of Company name, and amendment, replacements or cancellations;
Issuing Work Permits, including renewals, replacements, suspensions, or cancellations:
Registering technology transfer agreements and Trade Mark;
Negotiating and, upon government approval, signing bilateral investment promotion and pro-
tection treaties with other countries; and
Advising the government on policy measures needed to create an attractive investment climate
for investors.
In addition, the EIC offers the following free, confidential and customized services
to investors:
* Provision, through our website, various publications or through direct response to investor's
inquiries, of information on sector-specific business opportunities, business incorporation pro-
cedures, employment and related regulations.
+ Handholding support to the investors during the acquisition of land and utilities (water, electri-
cal power, telecom and other services).
3. Industry Park Development Corporation (IPDC)
+ Develop and administer Industrial Parks, lease developed land and lease and transfer, through
sale, constructions thereon:
* Prepare detailed national Industrial Parks Master Plan based on the national special Master
plan, and serve as the industrial park land bank in accordance with the agreements concluded
with regional governments;
 In collaboration with the concerned bodies, ensure that necessary infrastructure is accessible
to Industrial Park developers;
* Outsource, though management contracts, when it is deemed necessary, the management of
Industrial Parks;
* Promote extensively the benefits of Industrial Parks and thereby attract investors to the parks;
+ In line with directives and policy guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance sell and pledge
bonds and negotiate and sign loan agreement with local and international financial sources;
and
+ Engage in other related activities necessaries for the attainment of its purposes.
4. Ministry of Trade & Regional Integration
Promote the expansion of domestic trade and take appropriate measures to maintain
lawful trade practices; create conducive conditions for the promotion and develop-
ment of the countrys export trade and extend support to exporters;
* Establish a system that enable to ascertain that export or import goods are sold or bought at the
appropriate price make follow ups in collaboration with the concerned executive bodies and
take measures in accordance with the law against those who export by under invoicing as well
as import under or over invoicing;
= Establish foreign trade relations coordinate trade negotiations sign trade agreements in accor-
dance with law and implement same;
* Establish and follow up the implementation of comprehensive system for the prevention of
anti- competitive trade practices provide protection to consumers in accordance with the law;
* Provide commercial registration and business licensing services in accordance with the rele-
vant laws and control the use of business licenses for unauthorized purposes;
* Provide support for and monitor the establishment and operation of share companies with a
view to protect the interests of shareholders and the society;
+ Undertake and submit to the Council of Ministers price studies relating to basic commodities
and services that have to be under price control and upon approval follow up the implemen-
tation of same;
* Establish the legal metrological system of the country regulate its enforcement and coordinate
the concerned regulatory bodies;
* Control the qualities of export and import goods prohibit the importation and exportation of
goods that do not conform with the required standards and work in collaboration with the
concerned organs;
* Control the compliance of goods and services with the requirements of mandatory Ethiopia
standards and take measure against those found to be below the standards set for them;
* Cause the coordinated enforcement of standards applied by other enforcement bodies orga-
nize and direct implementation review conferences;
+ Organize the trade data of the country and disseminate same to the consumed bodies;
* Encourage the establishment of Chambers of Commerce and Sectorial Associations including
consumers associations and strengthen those already established.
5. Ministry of Industry
* Create an enabling system for enhanced participation and role of the private sector in the
industry in particular in the manufacturing industry; create conducive condition for the imple-
mentation of the same;
* Cause the building of capacity and enhancement of competitiveness of industries, investment
and manufacturing industries by providing the necessary support for researchers in the sector;
* Create conducive conditions for the participation of domestic and foreign investors in the
investment of manufacturing industry sector in accordance with the investment laws; establish
Mh 27
EI
IVESTMENT GUIDE TO ETHIOPIA AE de
a system to enable the institutions accountable to it to support mainly domestic investors and
implement the same.
+ Establish a system of capacity building, research and inculcation to maintain quality standards
and competitiveness of industrial in particular manufacturing industrial products in interna-
tional markets; oversee implementation of the same.
+ Establish working mechanism and formulate policy and strategy that enable to create linkage
and effective transformation between small, medium, and large-scale industries.
* Encourage the establishment of industrial, sectorial, and professional associations, and
strengthen those already established.
6. Ministry of Revenues
Collect revenue from customs duties and domestic taxes. In addition to raising
revenue, the Ministry contribute to the economic development and social welfare
by developing a modern tax and customs administration that employs professional
and highly skilled staff who promote voluntary compliance amongst individuals and
businesses and take swift action against those who do not comply.
7. Ethiopian Customs Commission (ECC)
Provide equitable, expeditious and quality service by establishing a modern customs
administration system. Moreover, the Commission collects duties and taxes timely
and efficiently on goods imported or exported. It also implements relevant customs
laws and international agreements approved and ratified by Ethiopia.
8. Ministry of Mines
Provides one-stop services for investors in mining operations: issues investment li-
cense, export permit, customs duty-and tax-free support letter etc.
The Licensing and Administration Directorate in the MoM issues
i. Reconnaissance Licenses
ii. Exploration Licenses
iii. Retention licenses
iv. Artisanal mineral operations licenses
v. Special small scale mineral operations licenses
vi. Small scale mineral operations licenses
vii. Large scale mineral operations licenses
9. Ministry of Labor & Social Affairs
Avails information on labor rules and regulations for investors Initiates and leads
a tripartite engagement with employer and employee associations with and
outside of industrial parks. Assigns labor inspectors to follow up and supervise on
implementation of labor laws by investors.
10. Development Bank of Ethiopia
A specialized financial institution established to promote the national development
agenda through development finance and technical support to viable investment
projects in priority sectors such as agriculture, agro-processing & manufacturing.
Provides medium and long-term loans for various projects focusing on priority invest-
ment areas and plays central role in promoting the over-all economic development
of the country.
11. National Bank of Ethiopia
Manages the countrys foreign exchange reserve; ensures effective use of such reserve
through monetary and financial regulations.
Issues approval of transactions involving hard currency (investment capital inflow,
repatriation of funds, suppliers credit, export/ import bank permit and so forth )
12. Ethiopian Electric Power
Administrates power plants in the country and purchases power from independent
power producers.
N. B. In greenfield investment, EIC has prepared 100 investment opportunity profiles
with the support of UNIDO.
(Please visit the link: https: //investment. unido. org )
A. Client Charter
TYPE OF SERVICE DELIVERY TIME FEE (ETB)
1 (Company name registration 1 hour 25
2 |Alteration/ amendment of a company name 1 hour 80
3 [Issuance of substitute certificate of a company name 1 hour 50
4 Notarization of memorandum of association 3 hours 810
5 Amendment/ change of memorandum of association 3 hours 400
6 [Issuance of commercial registration 3 hours 100
7 Amendment/ change of commercial registration 3 hours 80
8 [Replacement or substitution of commercial registration 1 hour 50
9 (Cancellation of commercial registration 5 working days 50
10 [Issuance of investment permit 3 hours 600
11 [Investment permit (expansion) 18 working days 300
12 [Renewal of investment permit (new/expansion) 2 working days 200/100
13 [Change/amendment of investment permit 3 hours 100
14 [Issuance of work permit 2 hours 2,000
15 [Renewal of work permit 1 hour 1,500
16 Substitution of work permit 1 hour 1,200
17 (Cancellation of work permit 3 hours
18 [Registration and issuance of certificate for technology transfer agreement 3 hours 200
19 Registration of a collaboration agreement concluded by a domestic investor 2 Noite 100
with export- oriented non-equity based foreign enterprise
20 [Issuance of business license 10 working days 100
21 [Renewal of business license 2 hours 100
22 |Amendment of business license 1 hour 80
23 | Cancellation of business license 30 minutes Free
24 | Capital registration 1 day Free
ap =
 Safaricom \)
Unies HUAWE!
YA { (ie nc EPIC
Qi, arvico re na = uc]
oo l Im} ses? ) Ontex RUE) DM Bs
Tasca oo
k=) Grisman Arvinn Raymond sie E . [CD DIAGEO {2 Lal
USEFUL CONTACTS
ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION (EIC)
P. O. BOX: 2313
Tel: +251 11 551 0033
Fax: +251 11 551 4396
Email: info@ethio-invest. com
Website: www. investethiopia. gov. et
MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
P. O. BOX: 393
Tel: +251 11 551 7345
Fax: +251 11 5514300/551 1244
Email : mfa. addis@telecom. net. et
Website: www. mfa. gov. et
MINISTRY OF TRADE
P. O. Box: 6945
Tel: +251-11-5507542
Fax: +251-11-5759871
Email: N/A
Website: www. moin. gov. et
MINISTRY OF LABOR & SOCIAL AFFAIRS
P. O. Box: 2056
Tel: +251-115-517080
Fax: +251-115-518396
Email: molsa. comt@ethionet. et
Website: www. molsa. gov. et
INDUSTRIAL PARK DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION NATIONAL BANK OF ETHIOPIA
DEVELOPMENT BANK OF ETHIOPIA
(IPDC)
Tel: +251-11-661-6986/661-6674
Email: admin. info@ipdec. gov. et
Website: www. ipdc. gov. et
MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY
P. O. Box: 2458
Tel: +251-115515411
Fax: +251-115-53 4968
Website: www. moi. gov. et
ETHIOPIAN ENERGY AUTHORITY
Tel: +251-115-507735
Fax: +251-115-507734
Website: www. eea. gov. et
Email: info@mom. gov. et
P. O. Box: 5550
Tel: +251-11-551-7430
Fax: +251-11-5514588
Email: nbeinfo@nbe. gov. et
Website: www. nbebank. com
ETHIOPIAN CUSTOMS COMMISSION
Tel: +251-8258748
Fax: +251-115-514396
Email: eccweb@revenue. gov. et
Website: www. ecc. gov. et
ETHIOPIAN CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY
P. O. BOX:978
Tel: +251- 116-650200
Fax: +251-116-650281
Email: eccweb @revenue. gov. et
P. O. Box: 1900
Tel: +251-11-551-1188/89
Fax: +251-11-551-1606
Email: dbe@ethionet. et
Website: www. dbe. com et
MINISTRY OF REVENUE
P. O. Box: N/A
Tel: +251-115-528577
Fax: +251-116-629842
Website: www. mor. gov. et
MINISTRY OF MINES
P. O. Box. : 486
Tel: +251-116-675495
Fax: +251-116-646336/4
Website: www. mom. gov. et
A