INVESTMENT
GUIDE TO
ETHIOPIA

/ EIC
ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
LAND OF OPPORTUNITIES
Ms. Lelise Neme
Commissioner
Dear esteemed investors,
Ethiopia as known by many as the land of origins,
is endowed with a swathe of investment
opportunities at all corners of the country. In the
last decade, the country has achieved a
remarkable and fast economic growth in the past
years. Home to the continents second largest
population, the country has been attracting high
amount of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in
recent years.
Backstopped by a profound economic strategy and
policies, the Government has been putting efforts
to create a business environment that is
conducive to investment through development of
various infrastructures.
Even though the country is positioned as a yet
untapped investment opportunity in Eastern
Africa, its remarkable growth is amplified with
various values and assets. The Government has
established infrastructures such as specialized
industrial parks that serve as a conducive
microclimate to investments and are equipped
with efficient and effective services, healthcare
center, commercial buildings, proper waste
treatment facilities, polices station, fire brigade
and 24/7 security services.
With an overarching homegrown economic
reform agenda which supports the fast growth
and puts the private sector at the heart of the
economic development, the country prioritized
seven investment sectors i. e. , Textile & Apparel,
Leather & leather products, Pharmaceuticals,
agro processing, tourism, ICT, mining, and
energy.
Tailored fiscal and non-flscal incentives
including customs, duties, and income tax
exemptions, guaranteed repatriation of funds,
bonded export facilities and availability of active
and trainable labor which represents 60% of the
total population offers great investment
opportunity.
Market access is also another opportunity the
country offers for successful investments. The
strategic location of the country that serves as a
spring off point to different African countries,
Europe and Asia, different trade agreements.
Furthermore, equipped with efficient logistical
hub such as Air transport through the legendary
Ethiopian airlines, clean powered railway,
suitable dry port, well-connected express roads,
and highways provide expedited transportation
services to investments.
As mandated and being an autonomous
government institution, the Ethiopian
Investment commission (EIC) carries out
efficient investment administration system to
attract foreign and domestic investments to
Ethiopia through promotional, facilitation and
aftercare services.
This guide is prepared to serve as an informational primer for you in the arena of investing in
Ethiopia including priority sectors and overview of different assets that you may wish to
consider. It is not a detailed guide to a specific investment sector, but well be offering those
subsequently. Finally, I sincerely invite you to invest in Ethiopia. We are highly committed to
become a reliable partner on your investment journey.
CONTENTS
5 Ethiopia at a Glance
6 Why Invest in Ethiopia
9 Investment Opportunities
28 Industry Park Development
34 Incentives
36 Investment Facilitation, Protection and Guarantee
38 Setting Up an Investment
40 Requirements to Obtain Investment Permit
47 Factors at a Glance
53 Laws & Regulations
56 Government Institutions Mandates
63 Client Charier
ETH PIA
ND OF OPPORTUNITIES
1. Ethiopia
at a glance
POLITICAL
SYSTEM
Federal state with a multi
party system
REGIONS
1 0 regions, and 2 city
administrates in the country
CAPITAL CITY
Addis Ababa, seat of the African
Union (AU) and United Nations
Economic Commission for Africa
(UNECA)
LEADING
EXPORTS
Cofee, oilseeds, gold, pulses, horticulture, live
animals, growing manufacturing export (textile &
apparel, leather & leather products etc
GDP & GDP
PER CAPITA
96.11 billion USD (2019) & 855.9 respectively
CLIMATE
Temperature in the highlands: 20' C- 3o'C, low in the highlands
up to 45' C. Rainfall ranges from 200 mm to 2000 mm and
highly suitable for production.
AREA 1.1 million square meters
LOCATION
Horn of Africa, at the
crossroads between Africa,
the Middle East & Asia
5
POPULATION
2nd most populous country
in Africa( 1 00+ million)
LANGUAGE
working federal language-
Amharic & English is widely
spoken
OTHER INFO
Currency: Ethiopian Birr
Country Code: +251
Time Zone: GMT +3
2. Why Invest in Ethiopia?
Ethiopia has become a preferred destination for foreign direct
investment and emerging hub for manufacturing in Africa due
to its:
Political Commitment from the Government
A Improving socio-economic governance with peace &
security.
A The government is always working hard to make the
investment policy beneficial to the country and the investors.
A new investment regulation and proclamation has been
enacted in 2020 to improve several issues regarding
investment.
A High level political commitment for investment promotion
and protection; investment policy making is led by the
Ethiopian Investment Board chaired by the Prime Minister.
A Wide-ranging incentive packages for priority sectors and
export-oriented investments.
A Bold initiative in the development of state-of-the art industrial
parks, electric-powered railway connecting the capital and
other economic corridors to the port of Djibouti.
Conducive Economic Factors
A Ethiopia aims to reach lower-middle-income status by 2025.
Ethiopias economy experienced strong, broad-based growth
averaging 9.8% a year from 2008/09 to 2018/19, Ethiopias
real gross domestic product (GDP) growth rebounded to 9%
in 2018/19.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 6
A Stable and conducive macroeconomic environment.
A FDI inflows to Ethiopia were USD 2.5 billion in 2019. In total,
FDI stocks were estimated at USD 25 billion in 2019.
(UNCTAD's World Investment Report 2020)
A Home grown Economic Reform Program: The Government of
Ethiopia (GoE) under the leadership of Prime Minister Abiy
Ahmed (PHD) - unveiled a Homegrown Economic Reform
Program aimed at unlocking the countrys development
potentials designed to propel Ethiopia into becoming the
African icon of prosperity by 2030.
Favorable Market Factors
A Africas second most populous nation with a population size
of over 100 million.
A 54 million active labor force, trainable and available at
competitive wage rate.
A Duty-free, quota-free access to the USA and EU markets
through AGOA and EBA, respectively
A Duty-free, quota-free access to Japan, Canada, China, Turkey,
Australia, and New Zealand - covering substantially all export
goods from Ethiopia. Preferential market access to India.
A Ethiopia is a member of ACFTA (African Continental Free
Trade Area) which is very beneficial for investors in terms of
trade activities within African continent.
A Member of COMESA with preferential market access to a
regional market of 400 million people.
A Strategic location with proximity to the Middle East, Europe,
and Asia.
7 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
For further information on bilateral agreements, please refer
EICs website; www. investethiopia. gov. et
Improving Infrastructure
A The newly built Addis-Djibouti electric-powered railway isfully
operational.
A Ethiopian Airlines Group, the Largest Aviation Group in has
successfully completed a new passenger terminal at its hub
Addis Ababa, Bole International Airport with emphasis on
biosecurity and biosafety measures. It operates the youngest
and most modern fleet to 127 international passenger and
cargo destinations across five continents. From its hub at
Addis Ababa, Ethiopian Airlines serves 117 international and
23 domestic destinations.
A Huge investment potential in renewable energy including
hydro solar, wind and geothermal; Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam - the largest hydroelectric power dam
in Africa - under construction (close to 79% completed),
expected to generate additional 6,000MW electricity.
A Expanding telecommunication services.
A Expansive road networks connecting national and regional
markets.
A Nine operational and six upcoming government industrial
parks; Six operational & one upcoming private industrial
parks in the pipeline.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 8
3. Investment Opportunities
and Priority Areas
There are numerous attractive investment opportunities in
Ethiopia. The government of Ethiopia in collaboration with
supporting stakeholders has identified several investment
opportunities in the country. Investors are also rewarded with
different incentives based on their project and sector they prefer
to engage. The investment opportunities, priority sectors and
incentives are presented as follows: -
Before going deep to the opportunities, it is important to mention
areas where investors are eligible to invest. Foreign investor(s)
can engage in various investment sectors according to the
Ethiopian investment regulation No. 474/2020. Previouslyclosed
sectors are now open for foreign investors. For instance,
telecommunication, logistics and transportation industry can
be regarded as examples. (Please refer the current Ethiopian
investment regulation No. 474/2020 from Ethiopian Investment
Commissions website: www. investethiopia. gov. et. )
The seven priority sectors are: Pharmaceutical, Agro
processing, Textile, Leather, Tourism, ICT and Mining & Energy.
9 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Manufacturing
A Vision: To become the leading manufacturing hub in Africa.
A Ethiopia offers a remarkable competitive advantage for
manufacturing industries due to:
A Government facilitation of efficiency-enhancing
investment solutions including industrial parks that are
ready for plug and play:
A Large pool of trainable work force available at
competitive wages:
A Cheapest energy rate on a global standard:
A Geographic proximity and preferential access to key
markets; and
A Abundance of high-quality industrial raw materials:
A Ethiopia is Africas largest raw material supplier for the
leather industry.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 10
Textile and Garment
The textile & garment sector in Ethiopia has been growing in the
past decade. There is access to major markets in the local and
international market. USA & UK are the major export destinations
for the Ethiopian textiles.
Investment Opportunities: includes commercial cotton
production, spinning, weaving and garment.
Opportunities for Private Sector:
A Textile manufacturing: Manufacturers producing any
cloth or goods prepared by weaving, knitting, or felting.
A Garment manufacturing: Manufactures producing any
article of clothing such as dresses, suits, shirts, trousers
made prepared from textile/fabric.
A Components and Trim manufacturing: Manufacturers
producing materials used as components & decorations of
garments such zippers, buttons, plastics, threads,
elastics, carton boxes, poly bags, hangers, printing,
etc.
11 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Leather and Leather Products Manufacturing
Ethiopia has the largest livestock population in Africa and ranks
6th in the world. The leather industry bases itself on the countrys
livestock resources. Indeed, Ethiopia possesses one of the world
largest livestock populations, 60.9 million heads of cattles, 31.8
million heads of sheeps and 30.7 million heads of Goats. This
enormous population of livestock provides ample opportunity
in the value chain starting from tanning of hides and skins all the
way up to the finished leather products. Manufacturing
companies can supply major markets in the world including Italy,
USA, & Germany.
Opportunities for Private Sector Includes: -
A Tanning of hides and skins
A Accessories: soles, synthetic sewing thread, plastic linen,
shoelaces, zippers, buckle
A Chemical inputs manufacturing for tannery use.
A Footwear, gloves, and other leather products
manufacturing
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 12
Pharmaceuticals
It is one of the fastest growing industries in Ethiopia with an
annual growth rate of 15%. Currently, the market is estimated to
be around one billion USD, of which more than 80% is met by
imported products that are mainly procured by the Government.
Ethiopia is one of the first African countries to have developed a
strategy for the industry.
Favorable Conditions for Pharmaceutical
Manufacturing in Ethiopia
A An industrial park fully specialized in pharmaceutical
products manufacturing and well-equipped with state-of-
the-art infrastructure.
A It is a priority sector for the government.
A High and growing domestic and regional markets. The
African pharma market is valued to be more than 20 Billion
USD.
A High diseases burden and expansion of health coverages
A Attractive investment incentives such as corporate income
tax exemptions up to 14 years depending on product type
and export performance.
13 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Long-term Government procurement guarantee, 25%
price preference and 30% advance payment to
government suppliers.
A Trainable workforce with more than 10 pharmacy schools.
A Competitive infrastructure including Ethiopian Airlines
and a railway connecting Kilinto Industrial Park to Djibouti
port.
Agro-Processing
Potential
A Ethiopia is a continental and global leader in the
production of a variety of raw materials needed for
processing:
A 5th largest producer of tropical fruits in Africa
A 3rd biggest producer of wheat in Africa
A 6th leading producer of livestock population globally
A 9th in chicken population in Africa
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 14
Fruit Juice
A Ethiopia has favorable agro-ecological climate condition.
A The Upper Awash valley can easily produce fruit all year.
A Arba Minch and Assossa are also high potential areas for
year-round.
A Most of the land available for growing tropical fruits is
suitable for organic.
A With basic irrigation, a new producer can increase yields
dramatically.
Edible Oil
A Ethiopia has abundant resources suitable for oilseed
production. Despite its potential, there is limited domestic
processing of edible oil (~4% of supply) and increasing
local demand, resulting in significant imports of edible oil
covering -95% of supply consisting mainly palm oil.
A Ethiopia is among the top 20 oilseed producers in Africa,
with majority of exports still being in raw form, with no
value addition
15 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Horticulture
Ethiopia is currently ranked 2nd in floriculture export in Africa and
among top 4 exporters in the world. Investment opportunities
include floriculture, fruit and vegetable processing. Roses are the
most widely produced varieties of flowers. Other types include
gyphophilia, hypericum, limonium, chrysanthemum, carnations,
static and pot plants. Ethiopia supplies 9% of global flower
market.
Herbs and Spices
A Ginger, hot pepper, fenugreek, turmeric, coriander, cumin,
cardamom, and black pepper.
A Close to 122, 700 hectares with spice production reaching
244,000 tons per year.
A The total potential for low land spice farming is estimated
to be 200,000 ha.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 16
The Government of Ethiopia has accorded a high priority to the
bamboo sector. The government proclaimed a 10year strategy
and action plan for bamboo sector development (2019 - 30) and
with the support of the International Bamboo and Rattan
Organization (INBAR),
A Ethiopia has the largest resource of bamboo in Africa, with
an estimated 1.47 million ha of two indigenous bamboos
species namely Oxytenanthera abyssinica (lowland
bamboo) and Oldeania alpina syn. Yushania alpina or
Arundinaria alpina (highland bamboo).
A Bamboo resources are concentrated in seven regions of
Ethiopia namely Amhara, Benishangul-Gumuz, Gambela,
Oromia, Sidama, Southern Nations, Nationalities, and
Peoples and Tigray regional states. An estimated 750,000
people depend on bamboo based economic activities
A Potential investors and entrepreneurs have an array of
opportunities to become pioneers of bamboo business in
the country.
17 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Potential Areas of Bamboo Investment
Bamboo has a huge potential to contribute to the development
of Ethiopias green economy. A large untapped bamboo
resource base is available that could be used to generate large-
scale employment, income, and socio-economic development,
in addition to environmental benefits. Opportunities for investing
on bamboo include but not limited to:
A Bamboo timber substitute industries (parquet floor, MDF
and OSB boards, lumber and panels, mat ply boards,
plastic composite products);
A Bamboo round pole and bend laminated furniture;
A Bamboo crafts and bio-plastics products;
A Bamboo stick-based products (curtains, mats, incense
sticks);
A Bamboo pulp and paper;
A Bamboo bio-energy.
A Construction.
A Bamboo eco-tourism;
A Bamboo carbon credit plantation.
Integrated Agro Industrial Parks
A The government has put in place integrated agro industrial
parks (IAIP) which are regional agro-processing zones
developed to attract investment and accelerate thegrowth
of agro-processing sector.
A These parks include: Bulbula - 263 ha, Bure - 261 ha,
Baeker - 259 ha and Yirgalem - 214 ha.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 18
These parks employ a holistic approach for input supply,
on-farm production, backward market linkage and raw
material sourcing to ensure sustainability and efficiency.
Tourism
Unity Park Entoto Park
A Known as Land of Origins, Ethiopia is among the worlds
best destination for tourism with strong service industry to
support the sector.
A Ethiopia is a land of rugged mountains (almost 25
mountains with over 4000 meters high) broad savannah,
lakes, and rivers.
A With 14 major wildlife reserves, Ethiopia provides a
microcosm of the entire sub-Saharan ecosystem.
A The unique Ethiopian Rift Valley (part of East African Rift
Valley is a remarkable region of volcanic lakes, with their
famous collections of birdlife, great escarpments, and
stunning vistas.
19 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
The timeless charm of Ethiopias natural, cultural, and
historical tourist attractions has been driving an influx of
tourists from far and wide.
A As the land where mankind, coffee and the Blue Nile trace
their roots, Ethiopia has always been a fascinating
destination for holidaymakers.
A As the Meetings, Incentives, Conferencing & Exhibitions
(MICE) tourism blossoms around the world, Ethiopia is
also uniquely positioned to reap the benefits, owing to its
unique place in Africas diplomatic landscape.
Ethiopia is home to several cultural and historical heritage sites
and the country is amongst the countries that have registered
their tangible and intangible heritage under UNESCOs cultural
heritage list. According to Ethiopian Ministry of Culture and
Tourism, UNESCO has recognized four intangible and nine
tangible Ethiopian (a total of 13) heritages. The nine tangible
heritages included in the list of UNESCOs are:
A Semen National Park, Natural
site registered in 1978.
A Lalibela Rock Hewn Churches
Registered in 1978.
A Fasil Ghebbi (Castles),
registered in 1979.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 20
Lower Omo Valley registered
in 1980.
A Lower Awash Valley registered
A Aksum registered in 1980.
A Tiya Archaeological Site
registered in 1980.
A Harar Jugol (Fortified City),
registered in 2006.
A Konso Cultural Landscape
registered in 2011.
21 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Opportunities
A Star designated hotels, lodges, and restaurants.
A Eco-lodge camp
A Boat transportation
A Hot-air ballooning
A Sky-cable car
A Lake side resorts
Incentives for Tourism
A Duty free privileges on Capital good and spare parts.
A Duty free privileges on finishing construction materials (if
they are going to build the hotel themselves).
A Duty free import of the following vehicles, (source: Vehicle
Incentives Directive, 2013)
A 3 station wagons (NEW)
A A bus (minimum capacity of 30 passengers excluding
the foldable sits)
A 5 years of income tax exemption for those who invest on
the five specified regions, (source: Ethiopian Investment
Board Directive, 2017)
I. Bale and Semen mountain national parks
II. Rif valley lakes (Abyata Shalla and Abaya Chamo)
III. Guralta Mountains (Wekro, Hawzen and Adigrat)
IV. Erta Ale (Dalol, Hadar, Afdera and Asela lakes)
V. Wonchi crater lake and afro alepine forest
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 22
Mining
A Ethiopia has a wide variety of untapped mineral resources
and offers opportunities in upstream and downstream
operations.
A Ethiopia is the only producer of opal in Africa, major gold
exporter, and emerging country for oil and natural gas
exploration.
A Mining potentials: gold, potash, platinum, opal, iron,
tantalum, marble, granite, limestone etc.
A Incentives:
A Lower corporate income tax rate of 25% for large-
scale mining projects
A Loss carry forward for 10 years.
A Accelerated depreciation on straight line basis over
useful life of four years.
A Customs duty and other tax-free import of
equipment, machinery, vehicles, and consumables.
23 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Attractive Royalties
A 7% Precious minerals
A 6% Semi-precious minerals
A 4% for industrial minerals
A 5% for metallic minerals
A 7% for gold
A 3% Construction minerals
A Petroleum royalties are negotiable.
Energy
The energy sector is one of the priority sectors in the country.
There are many investment opportunities in the energy sector.
The government also offers attractive incentives for investors
who wish to engage in this sector.
The GoE has also assigned one independent organization,
Ministry of Water Irrigation and Electricity (MoWIE), to manage
this the sector. MoWIE is the lead institution for the Energy
Sector. It oversees three supervised institutions.
Ethiopian Energy Authority
Ethiopian Electric Power (EEP)- has the responsibility to
generate, transmit and wholesale power.
Ethiopian Electric Utility (EEU) - has the responsibility to
distribute and sale in retail.
Ethiopian Energy Authority (EEA)-regulatory body for Energy
and energy efficiency.
Investor(s) can engage in the following activities. Generating
power from the following sources: -
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 24
A Hydro Power
A Geothermal
A Wind
A Solar
Incentives for Energy
A An investor engaged in generation and supply of electric
energy shall be entitled to a tax holiday from 4-5 years
depending on the region where the investment will be
made.
60 GW+
Potential power generation
The 1,870 MW Gibe III hydropower project, which doubled
Ethiopias electricity output, was completed in 2016. Ethiopia
is also developing what will be Africas biggest hydroelectric
power plant - the 6,000 MW Grand Renaissance Dam. This is
due for completion in 2022.
25 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Information Communication Technology
(ICT)
Government of Ethiopia focuses on building an inclusive digital
economy. In 2018, the government of Ethiopia announced its
decision to proceed with the privatization and the liberalization
of the telecommunication Sector.
Government Plan on ICT Sector.
A creating an enabling environment for creative industries
and innovation
A enhancing the role of the sector in socio-economic
activities to enable the country to grow rapidly.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 26
expanding ICT coverage in all parts of the country.
A providing competitive ICT services in terms of cost and
quality.
A creating a conducive environment for the private sector
to use ICT.
Opportunities:
A Telecommunication service
A Software, content, application, and database
development
A System integration and data center services
A ICT enable service.
A Manufacturing of ICT equipments
A e-commerce and ICT infrastructure,
Overview of the ICT Park
The government has built a park dedicated for ICT sector
development.
A The park is established on a 200-hectare site. The park
is built with an intention to create an Information
communication Technology (ICT) village based on close
linkage between research, industry and business in ICT
and ICT enabled services.
A The primary focus of the park is to attract ICT
manufacturing, development of the ICT services industry
and Business Process Outsourcing.
27 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
4. Industry Park Development
/A The government places significant importance to industrial
parks development and expansion.
A Domestic and foreign investors can engage in industrial
park development.
Nine Operational & Six Upcoming Government
Industrial Parks.
1. Bole Lemi IP I & 2 (Bole Lemi IP Phase one is operational
and Phase two is approaching to be operational)
A Cluster/ specialization: Textile and Leather
A Area: 327 hector (Phase 1 and 2)
2. Hawassa IP (Operational)
A Cluster / specialization: Textile and Apparel
A Area: 300 hector
3. Mekelle IP (Operational)
A Cluster / specialization: textile and apparel
A Area: 75 hector
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 28
4. Kombolcha IP (Operational)
Aciuster/specialization: textile and apparel
5. Adama IP (Operational)
A Area: 365 hector
6. Jimma IP (Post Implementation-Pre Operational)
A Cluster / specialization: textile, apparel, leather and
agro-Processing
7. Debre Birhan IP (Pre-Operational)
A Area: 100 hector
8. Bahir Dar IP (Operational)
9. Diradewa IP (Operational)
A Area: 150 hector
10. Kilinto IP (Implementation)
Aduster/ specialization: Pharmaceutical
A Area: 279 hector
11. Bulbula Agro IP (Implementation)
A Cluster / specialization: crops, fruit, vegetables, honey,
dairy, meat, and other animal Products
A Area: 258 hector
29 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
12. Bure Agro IP (Operational)
A Cluster / specialization: crops, fruit, vegetables, dairy,
meat, and other animal Products
A Area: 260 Hector
13. Baeker Agro IP (Implementation)
14. Yirgalem Agro IP (Operational)
A Cluster / specialization: crops, coffee, fruit, vegetables,
dairy, meat and other animal product
A Area: 176 hector
15. Semera IP (Implementation)
Six Operational and One Upcoming Private
Industrial Park
16. DBLIP
A Cluster/specialization: textile and garment
A Area: 78 hector
17. Huajian IP
A Cluster/specialization: leather and leather products
A Area: 138 hector
18. George shoe IP
A Cluster/specialization: leather, leather products and
tannery
A Area: 80 hector
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 30
19. Eastern IP
A Cluster / specialization: Mixed
A Area: 233 hector
20. CCECC IP
A Cluster/specialization: mixed
A Area: 1000 hector
21. CCCC IP
A Cluster/specialization: construction materials
22. Vogue IP
A Cluster /specialization: textile garment, leather, leather
products
A Area: 177 hector
A The parks are located along key economic corridors,
connected to ports by electric-powered railway lines
and roads
A Anchored on the principles of:
A Specialized parks: enhancing economy of scale and
efficiency through the development of sector- specific
specialized industrial parks;
A Export promotion: government provision of industrial
park incentives targeted at in creased export
performance and competitiveness;
A Sustainability: maintaining high environmental
standards through the use of renewable energy and
zero liquid discharge (ZLD) technology; assuring social
sustainability and local linkages;
31 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Vertical integration: enhancing forward and backward
linkages in the economy; and
A Skills development and competitiveness: developing
workers skills for enterprise productivity and
competitiveness.
Incentives for Industry Park
A 10-15 years income tax exemption for development of
industrial parks depending on park location (10 years if
in Addis Ababa or special zones of Oromia surrounding
Addis Ababa, and 15 years in other areas)
A 60-80 years land lease right at promotional rate; with sub
lease right.
A Reliable electricity at globally competitive rate- government
avails dedicated power substation for industrial parks.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 32
5. Incentives
Priority sectors identified in this guide & other sub-sectors
mentioned in the investment regulation have attractive incentives
listed below: -
Fiscal Investment Incentives
1. Corporate Income Tax Exemption:
A Exemption from corporate income tax up to 10 years
depending on the sector engagements.
A Additional 2-4 years exemption for industrial park
enterprises with at least 80% export or input supply to
exporters:
A Additional 30% deduction for 3 consecutive years if
investment in underdeveloped regions).
A Exemption from income tax up to 15 years for Industry
Park developers
2. Import Exemption:
A Capital Goods: 100% exemption from duties and
other taxes on imports of capital goods (machinery &
equipment)
A Construction Materials: Full exemption from duties
and other taxes on imports of construction & finishing
materials (for companies who construct their own
factory)
A Spare parts: with a value up to 15% of the total value of
capital goods (100% of total value of capital goods for
industrial park enterprises that are fully exporters)
33 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Vehicles: Pickups, delivery vans and trucks are duty
free for sectors eligible according to the investment
regulation of the country. However, the number of the
vehicles depending on the sector.
3. Export Incentives: Companies who produce their
products in Ethiopia and export have the following
incentives: -
A Full export duty exemption.
A Full import duty exemption on raw materials needed
to produce export commodities.
A Additional 2 years exemption for 60% exportersor
input suppliers to exporters within or outside of
industrial parks:
4. Loss Carry Forward: a right to carry for after the
base income tax exemption period expires.
Non-Fiscal Incentives
A Customs facilitation through bonded export factory and
similar other schemes.
A Guarantee against expropriation.
A Guarantee for repatriation of funds.
A Relaxed Industrial park land regime 60-80 years charge-
free lease for IP developers.
A Discounted lease rate for IP enterprises.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 34
Other Incentives
A Personal effects for residents in industrial parks.
A Investors buying above items from the local market can
seek fund of the duty paid.
A Export duty exemption- on all products except semi
processed hides and skins
A Loss carry forward- a right to carry forward loss incurred
within the period of income tax exemption for half of
the income tax exemption period after expiry, maximum
being 5 years.
Access to Preferential Markets:
Ethiopia benefits from preferential trade agreements with key
international markets, which investors can access freely. These
agreements include the following.
through African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) and
Everything But Arms (EBA).
A Duty-free, quota-free access to China, Japan, Canada,
Turkey, Australia, and New Zealand - covering substantially
all export goods from Ethiopia.
A Preferential market access to India.
A Member of Common Market for Eastern and Southern
Africa (COMESA) with preferential access to regional
market of 400 million people.
35 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
6. Investment Facilitation,
Protection & Guarantee
Facilitation
A One-stop shop and aftercare services under EIC (head
office and industrial park branches).
A Customs facilitation through bonded warehouse and
voucher schemes
A Expedited visa procedure- expedited procedure of
securing entry, work permit and certificate of residency.
A Online visa and multiple visa services
A Online investment application services
A The right to own immovable property as per investment
needs.
A The right to open and operate foreign currency accounts.
A The right to employ expatriate managers and experts.
Protection and Guarantee
A Constitutional guarantee to property rights
A Guarantee for repatriation of profits, dividends, and
other funds.
A Ethiopia is a member of the Multilateral Investment
Guarantee Agency (MIGA) and the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO).
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 36
Ethiopia has signed over 30 Bilateral Investment
Treaties and several Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreements- Providing investors with utmost
protection.
A Ranked 67/190 economies for ease of enforcing
commercial contracts-rating of OECD standard
(World banks Doing Business Report,2020)
A The right to own a dwelling house when investing a
minimum of 10,000,000 USD.
A The right to open and operate foreign currency
accounts.
A The right to employ expatriate managers and experts
Ethiopia has established legal and institutional
regimes safeguarding intellectual property rights.
A The protection of intellectual property rights which
include trademarks, certification, and collective
marks.
37 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
7. Setting up an Investment
Foreign investor(s) can be engaged in the following
investment types:
A. Greenfield Investments: Ethiopian investment
Commission will give an investment license for greenfield
investments made by foreign investor(s) & joint investments
made between foreign investor(s) & local investor(s). A
foreign company or investor can form the business as a:
A Sole Proprietorship: an individual is the owner of the
company.
A Private Limited Company: A new company formed by
two or more shareholders. The shareholders can be: -
A Two or more companies
A Company(s) and a person(s)
A Two or more individuals (The documentation will be
the same as the sole proprietorship company
registration)
A Branch Company: Existing foreign company can open a
branch company in Ethiopia.
B. Brownfield Investments
According to the investment regulation no. 474/2020, foreign
investor(s) interested to buy an existing enterprise or shares
should seek approval from Ethiopian Investment Commission.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 38
The initial step is to acquire investment permit from Ethiopian
Investment Commission. The requirements and procedures are
explained detail in the following pages.
The initial step for foreign investor(s) to form a company in
Ethiopia is to get an investment permit from EIC. Investor(s) can
apply for an investment permit in person at Ethiopian Investment
Commission HQ or online via this link; www. invest-
ethiopia. com. In doing so, investor(s) must comply with the
following requirements:
Sectorial Opening
Many previously closed investment sectors are now open for
foreign investors. Foreign investor(s) can engage in several
investment activities based on the Investment Proclamation No.
1180/2020 and Regulation No. 474/2020 (except the few sectors
reserved for domestic investors, joint investment with domestic
investors and the government in the same laws.
39 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
8. Requirements to Obtain
Investment Permit
The requirement to obtain investment permit for foreign
investor(s) are capital and documents.
A. Minimum Capital Requirement
According to the Investment Proclamation No. 1180/2020,
the minimum capital requirement and legal terms for
foreign investors to engage in various investment activities
is stated below:
A Investor(s) are expected to deposit the minimum
requirement in cash after document approval and
registration in Ethiopian Investment Commission.
A Foreign investor re-investing their profits or dividends
generated from existing enterprise in Ethiopia may not be
expected to deposit the minimum requirement mentioned
in the above table.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 40
Minimum Capital Requirement
100%
Joint
Type of the sector
foreign
investor(s)
venture
with local
For investment areas allowed
under the investment
proclamation.
USD
200,000
USD 150,000
Architectural or engineering
works or related technical
consultancy services, technical
testing & analysis or in
publishing works
100,000
USD 50,000
B. Document Requirements
Foreign investor(s) are expected to submit the following
documents to get approval for their investment projects
from EIC.
The document requirements for each type of company
formation is listed separately in the following table.
41 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Document Requirements
Sole
Proprietorship
Private Limited
Company
Branch
company
A Filled application form
A Existing company profile
A Investment visa & passport copy
A Parent company documents
authenticated in Ethiopian embassy
abroad, ministry of affairs andlocal
authentication office (if the
shareholder(s) are companies)
A Draft MoA & AoA for the proposed
A Authenticated parent company
documents (memorandum & article of
association, certificate of origin, minutes
of resolution)
A Power of attorney & business visa of the
general manager
N. B.
A Application forms and draft MoA & AoA mentioned inthe
table can be found online from EICs website; www.
investethiopia. gov. et
A Investment or business visa is required for foreign
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 42
investors. Visa applications can be obtained online via
evisa website; www. evisa. gov. et or in person at Ethiopias
diplomatic missions overseas.
A The main department for Immigration and nationality
affairs issues a residence permit to a foreign investor up
on submission of an investment permit issued in his/ her
name.
A A foreign investor who is a shareholder of a company
or branch company as well as expatriate personnel who
have work permit are entitled to get residence permit.
A Favorable visa terms for investors in industrial parks:
Multiple entry visa valid for up to five years is given for
foreign investors; up to three years long visa for industrial
park service providers, managers, board members and
senior experts employed by foreign investors.
Registration and Licensing Processes at EIC
1 Submit the following documents to EIC for approval
PLC
Filled application Form, existing company
profile & Investment visa
profile and,
If the shareholders are individuals=
Investment visa,
If the shareholders are companies=
notarized parent company documents
including certificate of incorporation,
minutes of resolution, memorandum, and
article of association & power of attorney.
43 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
2 Only for PLC
Authenticate parent company documents
article of association.
Power of attorney, passport, and business
visa of the general manager
After approval from EIC
ZA Check uniqueness of the company
name at EIC
ZA Edit, sign & authenticate memorandum
and articles of association of the new
company at EIC
3 Collect a supporting letter from EIC to open a foreign &
local bank account
4 Transfer / deposit the required minimum capital in cash
5. Submit authenticated office lease agreement & TIN
certificate (ONLY FOR PLC)
6 Submit confirmation letter to EIC & get the INVESTMENT
PERMIT CERTIFICATE
A All the mentioned documents in step 1 should be
authenticated by Ethiopian embassy abroad,
ministry of affairs & local authentication office
/A The average time to get an investment permit is
from 3 to 5 business/working days.
ZA EIC offers one stop service for the above activities
and the cost is very minimal.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 44
Industry Park Registration Process
Investors planning to develop an industrial park or make other
forms of investment within industrial parks will have to go
through different steps:
IP Developer: means any profit-making public, public-private
or private developer including the corporation engaged in
designing, constructing, or developing industrial parks in
accordance with investment proclamation & investment
regulations, industrial park developer permit and industrial park
developer agreement.
Steps:
1. Application to EIC
2. Approval by the Ethiopian Investment Board
3. Sign an Moll with EIC
4. Registration and licensing at EIC
IP operator: means any profit-making enterprise that operates,
maintains, or promotes industrial park in accordance with the
Investment Proclamation and Investment Regulation, the
industrial park operator permits and industrial park operator
agreement and, includes the Corporation.
2. Sign a tripartite Moll with IP developer & EIC.
3. Registration & licensing at EIC
4. Sign operations management agreement with IP developer
45 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
IP Enterprise/Tenant: means a public, private, or public-private
enterprise owned by Ethiopians, foreigners or jointly and
possess developed land under the industrial park through sub
lease or by renting or building a factory within the industrial
park to engage in manufacturing activity or in-service provision
for profit making in accordance with Investment Proclamation
and Investment Regulation, industrial park enterprise permit and
industrial park enterprise agreement.
2. Sign an Moll with EIC
3. Deposit commitment fee of USD 200,000 in IP Developers
account: to be accounted as part of initial capital or
licensing.
4. Registration and licensing at EIC.
5. Shed rental/sub-lease agreement with IP developer.
6. Handover by IP developer
For further information regarding industry park, refer the
industrial park proclamation No. 886/2015.
Aftercare Services:
After acquiring an investment permit, the good hand of Ethiopian
Investment Commission will follow you as you lay the ground for
your operation. EIC provides post- establishment facilitationand
follow-up services including, but not limited to:
A Facilitating acquisition of land and utilities (water,
electrical power, and telecom services)
A Processing of loans and residence permit applications
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 46
9. Factors at a Glance
Ethiopia offers a favorable business- operating environment.
The following provides an insight and a sense of the excellent
available opportunities.
Land
Land is available for investment on leasehold and rental basis.
Investor(s) can engage either in industrial parks or outside.
Industrial parks are governed by the federal government (EIC &
Industrial Parks Development Corporation). In the case of land
outside industrial parks, each regional government authorities
have the authority to give land for investments.
A Land Cost: each region and industrial parks have different
rate. Please refer the factor cost document on EICs
website, (www. theiguides. org/ethiopia)
A The government reserves dedicated land for commercial
farming of cotton, horticulture etc.
A Lease right is given for up to 80 years (depending on
location and sector of engagement)
A Industrial park enterprises have the option of sub- leasing
developed land to construct own production facility in
industrial parks (they can also rent or buy factory sheds)
Labor
A Ethiopia has a growing educated labor force- over 50
universities with around half million student population:
over 1,300 technical and vocational education and
Training (TVET) institutes with and annual intake close to
one million students.
47 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
A Globally competitive wage rate.
A Government-supported provision of skills trainings
through industry development institutes
A Flexible domestic labor laws and regulations:
1. No minimum wage requirement on private sector employers
2. Normal working hours per day is 8 (excluding breaks for
lunch)
3. Maximum number of working days per week is 6 (288 days
per year)
4. No general restriction on night works
5. The number of paid annual leave days for a starting employee
14; slight increment for additional years of services.
Infrastructure
A GERD, the largest hydroelectric power dam in Africa,
is 79% completed. (An individual working in the GERD
product)
A The electricity rate is presented below: -
No. Rates Birr/KWh
General Tariff Flat Rate 1.7611
Low Voltage Industry Tariff (Flat rate) 1.2927
Medium Voltage Industry Tariff-15Kv &
33 KV (Flat rate)
High Voltage Industry Tariff (Flat rate)
0.9969
0.7911
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 48
Water
A Relatively affordable and competitive water charge rate.
The rate is presented below: -
Tariff
category
(m3)
Domestic
supplied
from
borehole
(ETB/m3)
Recycled water
supply for industry
use (ETB/m3).
Limited to what
is released for
reprocessing.
Water use for
toilet flushing and
gardening (ETB/
m3) limited to what
1(0-7) 1.75 0 0
II (8- 20) 3.80 0 0
III (21-40) 7.75 0 0
IV (41-100) 5.95 0 0
V(101-300) 7.45 0 0
I(301-500)
VII (600 and
above)
9.3 0 0
11.6 0 0
49 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Transport
Air
A A world-class and Star
Alliance member national
airline that flies to about 127
international passenger and
cargo destinations across
five continents; also flies to
over 23 domestic passenger
destinations.
A Has promotional rate for export products.
A Addis Ababa Bole International Airport serves as a regional
base for other airlines such as KLM, Lufthansa, Emirates,
Qatar, and Turkish Airlines.
Road
A High quality road
infrastructure network
connecting major cities,
towns, and local markets in
A International highways connecting Ethiopia with neighboring
countries and regional market.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 50
Railway
A Over 30kms Addis Ababa
light rail-fully operational,
with the capacity of 80,000
passengers/hour-first of its
kind in sub-Saharan Africa.
A More than 750kms, Addis
Ababa Djibouti electric rail
way route completed-set to significantly reduce the time
and cost of inland transport for import/export items.
A Several other rail-way lines under construction which
connects all major economic corridors in Ethiopia.
Sea
A Reliable coastal and
international marine and
inland water transport
services from the Ethiopian
Shipping and Logistics
Services Enterprise (ESLSE)
that reaches to 260 destination ports.
A Promotional rate for the manufacturing sector.
A Approximate distance from the center-91 Okms to port of
Djibouti (gate for a lions share of import/export), 964kms
port of Barbara, 1881kms to port Sudan and 2077kms to
port Mombasa.
51 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Finance
A There are close to 20 banks and insurance companies.
A The Development Bank of Ethiopia provides preferential
loan for export-oriented investments.
A Foreign investors can open a foreign account through
approval from the National Bank of Ethiopia.
A Lease finance scheme is available.
A Foreign investors can access foreign loan.
Tax
Tax Rates Description
0-35% Tax on income derived from employment
30% Taxable income from business
Withholding tax on goods imported for commercial
3%
10%
5%
15%
0-35%
0-100%
use
Dividend tax on profits distributed to shareholders
Tax on royalty income
Tax on interest income from savings in local financial
institutions
Value added tax on imported items that are note ex
empted by law
Custom duty on imported items
Excise tax on selected import items defined by law
(items considered luxurious, hazardous to healthetc)
2-20%
Turnover tax on supply of goods or rendering of ser
vices.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 52
10. Laws and Regulations
Ethiopia follows a civil law legal system where major lawsare
codified under civil, commercial, penal, and other codes. The
constitution is the supreme law of the country, under the
constitution are proclamations that are passed by the parliament,
followed by regulations that are enacted by the council of
ministers, and implementing directives passed by ministries
or agencies, all proclamations and regulations are published
in official gazettes. Below is the most relevant legislation as
related to investment.
Investment Laws:
A Investment Proclamation No 1180/2020
A Investment Regulation No. 474/2020
A Investment Directives- Directive on Duty-free import of
motor Vehicles No. 4/2005 (E. C)
Industrial Park Laws:
A Industrial Parks Proclamation No. 886/2015
A Industrial Parks Regulation, No.474/2017
53 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
Commercial Matters:
A Commercial Registration and Business Licensing
Proclamation No. 980/2016.
A Trade Practices and Consumer Protection Proclamation
No. 813/2013
A Civil Code No.165/1960 Amended Proclamation No.
639/2009.
Tax Laws:
A Income Tax Proclamation No. 979/2016
A Tax Administration Proclamation No. 983/2016
A Value Added tax Proclamation No. 1157/2019.
A VAT Regulation No. 79/2002
A Excise Tax Proclamation No. 1186/2020.
Labor Law:
A Labor Proclamation No. 1156/2019.
Customs Law:
A Customs Proclamation No. 859/2014
A Export Trade Duty Incentive Schemes Proclamation No.
768/2012
A Ethiopian Customs Guide, Ethiopian Revenues and
Customs Authority, March 2017
Intellectual Property:
A Copyrightand Neighboring Rights Protection Proclamation
No.410/2004, Amendment Proclamation 872/2014.
A Trademark Registration and Protection Proclamation No.
501/2006
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 54
Trademark Registration and Protection Regulation No.
273/2012
A Inventions, Minor Inventions, and Industrial Designs
Regulation No. 12/1997
Environmental Laws:
A Environmental Impact Assessment Proclamation No.
299/2002
A Environmental Pollution Control Proclamation No.
300/2002 Environmental laws:
Land Laws
A Land lease proclamation No. 721/2011
Foreign Exchange Laws:
A Transparency in Foreign Currency Allocation and Foreign
Exchange
A Management Directive No. FXD/45/2016, Amendment
Directive No FXD/46/2017
A Banking Business (Amendment) Proclamation No.
1159/2019
A Establishment and Operation of Foreign Currency Saving
Account for Residents of Ethiopia, Non-Resident Ethiopian
and Non- Resident Ethiopian Origin Directive NO. FXD/68
72020
A Directives No. FXD/48/2017 directive for amended of
retention and utilization of export earnings and inward
remittance directive No,11/1998.
A Directives No. FXD/49/2017 limits on the birr and foreign
currency holding in the territory of Ethiopia.
55 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
11. Government Institutions
Mandates
1. Ethiopian Investment Board
A Chaired by the Prime Minster; members are composed
of relevant Minsters.
A Makes high-level decision on investment policy issues.
A Supervises investment promotion and facilitation
activities.
2. Ethiopian Investment Commission
The Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) is an autonomous
government institution accountable to the countrys Investment
Board, which is chaired by the Prime Minister. A Commissioner,
who is also member of the Board, heads the EIC.
The EIC has restructured itself recently with a view to becoming
more effective at attracting FDI and improving the services
provided to investors.
The main services provided by EIC include:
A Promoting the countrys investment opportunities and
conditions to foreign and domestic investors.
A Issuing investment permits, business licenses and
construction permits:
A Notarizing memorandum and articles of association and
amendments:
A Issuing commercial registration certificates as well as
renewals, amendments, replacements, or cancellations:
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 56
Effecting registration of trade or firm name and
amendment, as well as replacements or cancellations:
A Issuing work permits, including renewals, replacements,
suspensions, or cancellations:
A Registering technology transfer agreements and export-
oriented non-equity-based foreign enterprise collaborations
with domestic investors:
A Negotiating and, upon government approval, signing
bilateral investment promotion and protection treaties with
other countries; and
A Advising the government on policy measures needed to
create an attractive investment climate for investors.
In addition, the EIC provides the following free, confidential, and
customized services to investors:
A Provision, through our website, various publications, or
through direct response to investors inquiries, of
information on sector-specific business opportunities,
business incorporation procedures and related regulations,
employment regulations.
A Handholding and supporting the investor during the
acquisition of land and utilities (water, electrical power, and
telecom services); the processing of loans and residence
permit applications; the approval of environmental impact
assessments studies for investment projects; and the
issuance of a tax identification number (TIN).
57 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
3. Industry Park Development Corporation
(IPDC)
A Develop and administer Industrial Parks, lease developed
land and lease and transfer, through sale, constructions
thereon:
A Prepare detailed national Industrial Parks Master plan
based on the national special Master plan, and serve as the
industrial park land bank in accordance with the agreements
concluded with regional governments;
A In collaboration with the concerned bodies, ensure that
necessary infrastructure is accessible to Industrial Park
developers;
A Outsource, though management contracts, when it is
deemed necessary, the management of Industrial Parks;
A Promote extensively the benefits of Industrial Parks and
thereby attract investors to the parks;
A In line with directives and policy guidelines issued by the
Ministry of Finance sell and pledge bonds and negotiate
and sign loan agreement with local and international
financial sources; and
A Engage in other related activities necessaries for the
attainment of its purposes
4. Ministry of Trade & Industry
/A Promote the expansion of domestic trade and take
appropriate measures to maintain lawful trade practices:
A Create conducive conditions for the promotion and
development of the countrys export trade and extend
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 58
support to exporters;
A Establish a system that enable to ascertain that export or
import goods are sold or bought at the appropriate price
make follow ups in collaboration with the concerned
executive bodies and take measures in accordance with the
law against those who export by under invoicing as wellas
import under or over invoicing;
A Establish foreign trade relations coordinate trade
negotiations sign trade agreements in accordance with law
and implement same;
A Establish and follow up the implementation of
comprehensive system for the prevention of anti
competitive trade practices provide protection to
consumers in accordance with the law;
A Provide commercial registration and business licensing
services in accordance with the relevant laws and control
the use of business licenses for unauthorized purposes;
A Provide support for and monitor the establishment and
operation of share companies with a view to protect the
interests of shareholders and the society;
A Undertake and submit to the council of Ministers price
studies relating to basic commodities and services that
have to be under price control and upon approval follow
up the implementation of same
A Establish the legal metrological system of the country
regulate its enforcement and coordinate the concerned
regulatory bodies
A Control the qualities of export and import goods prohibit the
59 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
importation and exportation of goods that do not conform
with the required standards and work in collaboration with
the concerned organs;
A Control the compliance of goods and services with the
requirements of mandatory Ethiopia standards and take
measure against those found to be below the standards set
for them;
A Cause the coordinated enforcement of standardsapplied
by other enforcement bodies organize and direct
implementation review conferences.
A Organize the trade data of the country and disseminate
same to the consumed bodies:
A Encourage the establishment of chambers of commerce
and sectorial associations including consumers associations
and strengthen those already established.
5. Ministry of Revenue
A Collect revenue from customs duties and domestic taxes.
In addition to raising revenue, the ERCA is responsible to
protect the society from adverse effects of smuggling.
6. Ethiopian Custom Commission (ECC )
A Collect revenues from customs duties. In addition to raising
revenue, the ECC is responsible to protect the society
from adverse effects of smuggling. It seizes and takes
legal action on the people and vehicles involved in the act
of smuggling while it facilitates the legitimate movement
of goods and people across the border.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 60
7. Ministry of Mines, Petroleum & Natural Gas
A Provides one-stop services for investors in mining &
petroleum operations: issues investment license, export
permit-, customs duty- and tax-free support letter etc.
The Licensing and Administration Directorate in the MOMP
issues
I. Reconnaissance Licenses
II. Exploration Licenses
III. Retention licenses
IV. Artisanal mineral operations licenses
V. Special small scale mineral operations licenses
VI. Small scale mineral operations licenses
VII. Large scale mineral operations licenses
8. Ministry of Labor & Social Affairs
A Avails information on labor rules and regulations for
investors
A Initiates and leads a tripartite engagement with employer
and employee associations with and outside of industrial
parks.
A Assigns labor inspectors to follow up and supervise on
implementation of labor laws by investors.
9. Development Bank of Ethiopia
A A specialized financial institution established to promote
the national development agenda through development
finance and technical support to viable investment projects
61 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
in priority sectors such as agriculture, agro-processing &
manufacturing.
A Provides medium and long-term loans for export-oriented
investment projects in priority sectors.
10. National Bank of Ethiopia
A Manages the countrys foreign exchange reserve; ensures
effective use of such reserve through monetary and
financial regulations.
A Issues approval of transactions involving hard currency
(investment capital inflow, repatriation of funds, suppliers
credit, export/import bank permit etc)
11. Ethiopian Electric Power
A Administrates power plants in the country and buys power
from independent power producers.
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 62
12. Client Charter
No. TYPE OF SERVICE DELIVERY
TIME
FEE
(ETB)
1 Company name registration
2 Alteration/ amendment of a company name
Issuance of substitute certificate of a company
3 name
Notarization of memorandum and articles of
association
5 Amendment/ change of memorandum and
articles of association
6 Issuance of commercial registration
Amendment/ change of commercial
7 registration
Replacement or substitution of commercial
8 registration
9 Cancellation of commercial registration
10 Issuance of investment permit
11 Investment permit (expansion)
12 Renewal of investment permit (new/expansion)
13 Change/amendment of investment permit
14 Issuance of work permit
15 Issuance of work permit
16 Renewal of work permit
17 Substitution of work permit
18 Registration and issuance of certificate for
technology transfer agreement
Registration of a collaboration agreement
19 concluded by a domestic investor with export-
oriented non-equity based foreign enterprise
20 Issuance of business license
21 Renewal of business license
1 hour
3 hours
5 working days
18 working days
2 working days
3 hors
2 hours
10 working days
25
80
50
810
400
100
600
300
200/100
2000
1500
1200
200
63 An Investment Guide to Ethiopia
International Companies Operating in Ethiopia
DIAGEO
Z Quadrant
Apporel Group Pic
(JAtCevev'
CHARGEURS
FASHION TECHNOLOGIES
| AfVIAD
HYATT
REGENCY
TAL Apparel
ISABELLA
HUAWEI
An Investment Guide to Ethiopia 64
Ethiopian Investment Commission
P. O. BOX: 2313
Tel: +2511155100 33
Fax: +251II55143 96
Email: info@ethio-invest. com
Website: www. investethiopia. gov. et
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
P. O. BOX: 393
Tel: +251115517345
Fax: +251115514300/5511244
Email: mfa. addis@telecom. net. et
Website: www. mfa. gov. et
Industrial Parks Development
Corporation (IPDC)
Tel: +251116616986/6616674
Fax: N/A
Email: admin, info@ipdc. gov. et
Website: www. ipdc. gov. et
National Bank of Ethiopia
P. O. BOX: 5550
Tel: +251 115517430
Fax: +251 II 5514588
Email: nbeinfo@nbe. gov. et
Website: www. nbebank. com
Development Bank of Ethiopia
P. O. BOX: 1900
Tel: +251 ll 5511188/89
Fax: +251 ll 55 ll 606
Email: dbe@ethionet. et
Website: www. dbe. com. et
Ministry of Trade & Industry
P. O. BOX: 6945
Tel: +25111550 75 42
Fax: +25111575 98 71
Email: N/A
Website: www. moin. gov. et
Addis Ababa Chamber of Commerce
P. O. BOX: 2458
Tel: +2511155180 55
Fax: +2511155H4 79
Email: info@addischamber. com
Website: www. addischamber. com
Ethiopian Customs Commission
P. O. BOX: N/A
Tel: +2518258748
Fax: +251ll5514396
Email: eccweb@revenue. gov. et
Website: www. ecc. gov. et
Ministry of Revenue
Tel: +25111 552 85 77
Fax: +251 ll 662 98 42
Website: www. mor. gov. et
Ministry of Labor & Social Affairs
P. O. BOX: 2056
Tel: +2511155170 80
Fax: +2511155183 96
Email: molsa. comt@ethionet. et
Website: www. molsa. gov. et
Tel: +25111550 7735
Fax: +25111550 7734
Website: www. eea. gov. et
Ethiopian Civil Aviation Authority
P. O. BOX: 978
Tel: +251 ll 665 02 00
Fax: +25111665 02 81
Email: civil. aviation@ethionet. et
Website: www. ecaa. gov. et
Ministry of Mines & Petroleum
P. O. BOX: 486
Tel: +25111 66754 95
Fax: +251116 646 33 64
Email: federal@miningethiopia. info
Website: www. mom. gov. et
Africa Avenue, infront of Dembel City Center
P. O. Box 2313, Addis Ababa Ethiopia
Fax: +251 II 55143 96
September 2021/2022