In partnership with:

VA International
Trade
/ Centre Sas mr Eidhmion
thbrRr KITA bed?
 International Trade Centre 2019
The International Trade Centre (ITC) is the joint agency of
the World Trade Organization and the United Nations.
Street address:
Postal address:
Telephone:
Fax:
E-mail:
Internet:
ITC
54-56, rue de Montbrillant
1202 Geneva, Switzerland
Palais des Nations
1211 Geneva 10, Switzerland
+41-22 730 0111
+41-22 733 4439
itcreg@intracen. org
http: /maww. intracen. org
i
AHH
a Li
TIN Le
ABOUT THE REPORT
Set within the context of increasing Chinese investment in Africa, this guide for Chinese investors shows how
to embrace sustainability along their investment journey in Ethiopia.
The guide contains mandatory requirements and additional sustainability practices for agroprocessing and
light manufacturing for the country. It shows investors how to benefit from caring for the environment and
local communities. It also helps them to embed sustainability in all steps of their business operations, thus
contributing to sustainable development.
Publisher: International Trade Centre
Title: Ethiopia: Sustainable investment in agroprocessing and light manufacturing
Publication date and place: Geneva, November 2012
Page count: 60
Language: English
ITC Document Number: OAP-19-123. E
Citation: International Trade Centre (2019). Ethiopia: Sustainable investments in agroprocessing and light manufacturing sectors.
ITC, Geneva.
For more information, contact: Ingrid Colonna (colonna@intracen. org)
For more information on the Partnership for Investment and Growth in Africa, see: http: //www. intracen. org/piga/
ITC encourages the reprinting and translation of its publications to achieve wider dissemination. Short extracts of this paper may
be freely reproduced, with due acknowledgement of the source. Permission should be requested for more extensive reproduction
or translation. A copy of the reprinted or translated material should be sent to ITC.
Digital images on front cover:  Shutterstock
 International Trade Centre (ITC)
ITC is the joint agency of the World Trade Organization and the United Nations.
Foreword
International Trade Centre
The Partnership for Investment and Growth in Africa (PIGA) is supporting Ethiopia to
attract foreign direct investment, with a high potential developmental impact in the
agroprocessing and light manufacturing sectors, to contribute to job and growth
creation and spillover benefits for the local economy.
Foreign investment in these two productive sectors can unlock opportunities to
increase exports to regional and global markets, and better serve the local market,
while contributing to the countrys development agenda. To do so, investors need to
implement more inclusive and sustainable social, environmental and labour practices,
aligned with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
With the aim to promote sustainable investment practices in Ethiopia, this handbook
provides investors guidance on how to comply with legal requirements and presents
additional practices concerning environmental and social sustainability to be considered
throughout business operations in the country. It also provides information on the
business case of sustainable investment.
The findings stem from extensive research within the country and in China, joining the
insights of various ministries, investors, and other stakeholders with the trade expertise
and support of the International Trade Centre. | hope that this investment guide proves
a useful tool for companies and policymakers in Ethiopia.
Arancha Gonzalez
Executive Director
Ethiopia: Sustainable investment in agroprocessing and light manufacturing
Ethiopian Investment Commission
As we work hard to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) to grow our economies,
how to make these investments socially and environmentally sustainable remains a key
concern. As a first step, the Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) has integrated the
principle of sustainable and responsible investments into every investment agreement
that it signs with investors. This is meant to urge investors to comply with the Ethiopian
Government's social and environmental protection laws and regulations, as well as
international standards and best practices.
To do so, investors need to know what the laws, regulations and standards are and
how to comply with them. Hence, EIC enlisted the support of our long-time and valued
partner in promoting and attracting foreign investment, the International Trade Centre
(ITC), through its Partnership for Investment and Growth in Africa (PIGA) project,
to identify all current laws, regulations and local and international best practices related
to sustainability.
There is a special focus on Chinese investment in this handbook. This has to do with
the fact that Chinese investors represent close to 60% of the FDI inflow to Ethiopia,
and a large number of potential and existing Chinese investors have expressed interest
in receiving guidance on the issue of sustainability from the PIGA project and EIC.
However, we believe all investors, both foreign and local, will benefit from the guidance
this handbook provides to make their investments sustainable.
EIC is glad to have collaborated with ITC on this work. ITC has brought a dedicated,
experienced and highly qualified team of experts on sustainability to work on this
assignment. This has benefited EIC staff members who have collaborated on this work.
Furthermore, ITC, as an international organization and an agency of the UN, brings
wide exposure to international experiences and best practices on sustainable and
responsible investment.
The handbook follows a step-by-step approach to walk the investor through social
and environmental compliance requirements over the typical investment timeline, from
starting a business, operationalizing and expanding/closing out. It details applicable
laws in Ethiopia, and provides additional standards and best practices that investors
may implement voluntarily.
We are confident that investors will find these guidelines useful to their efforts in making
socially and environmentally responsible and sustainable investments. EIC management
and staff will happily and readily respond to investors seeking clarification or additional
information on any of the content provided herein.
Abebe Abebayehu
Commissioner
Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC)
Acknowledgements
The International Trade Centre (ITC) expresses its gratitude to all parties involved in
developing this publication. It was produced under the Partnership for Investment
and Growth in Africa (PIGA), a project implemented by ITC and funded by the United
Kingdom Department for International Development (DFID). PIGA is implemented in
cooperation with the China Council for Promotion of International Trade (CCPIT) and the
China-Africa Development Fund (CADFund), which were both instrumental in gathering
the data for this guide.
Andreas Beavor was responsible for data collection and the initial drafting of the
handbook. Ana Batalhone and Madison Wilcox (ITC) managed and prepared the final
draft, under the supervision of Joseph Wozniak (ITC). Ana Batalhone coordinated the
development process. Thanks are due to Veronique Rondeau and Ingrid Colonna (ITC)
for their leadership and various contributions to the handbooks development and
revision under the guidance of Xuejun Jiang (ITC). Anders Aeroe, Annegret Brauss,
Delphine Clement, Joseph Wozniak, Tianyu Mao, Quan Zhao and Wenwen Sheng (all
ITC) provided valuable comments and feedback. Alicia Rodriguez, Helen Griffin and
Ha Vu provided administrative support. Natalie Domeisen and Evelyn Seltier (ITC)
managed the editorial production. Cheryl Rosebush edited the report and Iva Stastny
Brosig provided graphic and layout services. Serge Adeagbo and Franco lacovino (ITC)
provided digital printing services.
ITC would like to express appreciation to the representatives of enterprises and
institutions who agreed to be interviewed and share their experiences investing in the
country. They include Hanna Arayaselassie, Hailemichael Tessema, Hilina Getachew
and Samuel Assefa Bedasso (Ethiopian Investment Commission), Luo Pengcheng
(Embassy of China in Ethiopia), Fekadu Gebru Senbete (Ministry of Labour and Social
Affairs), Leake Tesfahune (Environment Protection Commission), Hayat Abdulmalik,
Nigussie Abebe and Tewodoros Yilma Belachew (Enterprise Partners). Thanks are
due to Addisu Biazen, Anbessaw Serebe, and Mebrahtom Gebreyesus (Ethiopian
Investment Commission) for providing feedback to Chapter 2. Special thanks go out
to Amdework Dilnessaw, Yixin Yu (ITC) for supporting data collection in Ethiopia and
providing feedback for the handbook.
About ITC
Established in 1964, the International Trade Centre (ITC) is the joint agency of the World Trade Organization and
the United Nations. Its mission is to foster inclusive and sustainable economic development and contribute
to achieving the United Nations Global Goals for Sustainable Development. ITC is the only development
agency that is fully dedicated to supporting the internationalization of small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs). It helps SMEs in developing and transition economies become more competitive and connected to
international markets for trade and investment, thus raising incomes and creating job opportunities, especially
for women, young people and poor communities. ITC works with policymakers, trade and investment support
institutions, exporters and other stakeholders in the public and private sectors to enable export success of
SMEs in developing countries and transition economies.
http: //www. intracen. org/
About the Partnership for Investment and Growth in Africa
The Partnership for Investment and Growth in Africa (PIGA) is part of Invest Africa, a flagship programme of
the United Kingdom Department for International Development (DFID) facilitating foreign direct investment
with high development impact into selected African countries.
Under Invest Africa, PIGA aims to contribute to job creation and sustainable growth in Ethiopia, Kenya,
Mozambique and Zambia by supporting these countries to attract foreign direct investment, specifically
Chinese investment, in the agroprocessing and light manufacturing sectors. PIGA is also designed to
enhance the capacity of these countries for effective investment promotion.
PIGAis implemented by the International Trade Centre in cooperation with the China Council for the Promotion
of International Trade (CCPIT) and the China-Africa Development Fund (CADFund).
http: //www. intracen. org/piga/
About the Ethiopian Investment Commission
The Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) is an autonomous government institution responsible
for promoting, coordinating and facilitating private investments in Ethiopia (as defined in the
Investment Proclamation No.769/2012 and the Council of Ministers Regulation No. 313/2014). At
the regional level, EIC collaborates with regional investment agencies. In 2017, EIC received the
United Nations Award for outstanding performance in targeted promotion, facilitation and execution of
sustainable investment projects. A year later, the agency was awarded the "Best Investment Promotion
Agency in East Africa by the Annual Investment Meeting AIM.
Contents
Foreword: International Trade Centre \
Foreword: Ethiopian Investment Commission VI
Acknowledgements Ail
Acronyms XI
Executive summary. XII
CHAPTER 1 = WHY INVEST SUSTAINABLY? 1
Basic concepts 2
The three sustainability pillars, 3
The UN Sustainable Development Goals 4
Sustainable investment initiatives of Chinese companies OVErSeas...... mmm: 5
China's vision, 5
More Chinese companies adopt sustainability practices 5
A win-win environment for Chinese companies going global 6
The business case for sustainable investments 6
Caring for the environment is good for business, 7
Improving businesses reputation through a responsible approach to workers
and communities 7
Local supply chains reduce costs and improve quality, 3
The value of transparency and anti-corruption policies, 3
Legal requirements, voluntary standards and corporate social responsibility... 9
Legal requirements: Legislation and mandatory standards, 9
Integrating voluntary sustainability standards 9
Corporate social responsibility activities, 10
Sustainability requirements and measures in business operations... 11
Areas of concern for sustainability, 12
CHAPTER 2 = SUSTAINABILITY REQUIREMENTS IN ETHIOPIA, 15
General principles 17
Ethiopia: Legal environmental and labour requirements 18
Country background, 18
Environmental regulations and guidelines 18
Labour laws and workplace provisions 20
Summary checklist 22
Government institutions most relevant to sustainable investment 24
CHAPTER 3 = ADDITIONAL SUSTAINABILITY MEASURES
Site selection aligned with sustainability.
Use of resources
27
29
Working conditions
Investing in local skills and managers
Building the skills and capacity of local partner companies
Communications and public relations,
Corporate social responsibility strategy.
Advice from local governments
Engaging with the local business community.
Closing strategy aligned with sustainability.
Guidelines, voluntary standards and resources
Chinese sector-specific guidelines
Voluntary sustainability standards
Sustainability resources and networks in sub-Saharan Africa
30
32
33
34
35
37
38
39
41
APPENDICES
Appendix I Sustainable Development Goals
Appendix II The UN Global Compact Principles
Endnotes
References
44
TABLES
Table 1.
Sustainability areas of concern, 12
FIGURES
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
BOXES
The three pillars of sustainability. 3
Legal requirements and additional sustainability considerations
throughout business operations 11
Checklist: Ethiopia's environmental and labour requirements for investors 22
Voluntary measures for sustainable business conduct, 28
Free e-learning courses by sustainability area, 36
Box 1: Anticorruption as a complementary sustainability pillar, 3
Box 2: Sustainability performance and access to finance 7
Box 3: Chinese Sustainability guidelines developed for Chinese companies working abroad... 35
Box 4: Courses on cross-cutting sustainability topics 36
Acronyms
Unless otherwise specified, all references to dollars ($) are to United States dollars, and all references to tons
are to metric tons.
CSR
EIA
NGO
PIGA
SDG
UN
Corporate social responsibility
Environmental impact assessment
Non-governmental organization
Partnership for Investment and Growth in Africa
Sustainable Development Goal
United Nations
Executive summary
Over the past two decades, China has become Africa's biggest economic partner. More
than 10,000 Chinese-owned firms operate in Africa, around 90% of which are privately
owned. In manufacturing, it is estimated that 12% of Africa's industrial production,
valued at some $500 billion a year, is handled by Chinese firms.
Many Chinese enterprises have committed to long-term engagement in Africa,
particularly in the manufacturing and agricultural sectors. This provides significant
opportunities to support local communities and local economies in their development
efforts through sustainable investment practices.
While many companies engage in sustainable business practices, there are lessons
to be learned and room for improvement. Despite the strong push by the Chinese
government to encourage responsible business conduct overseas, the increasing
amount of mandatory standards and voluntary frameworks are unlikely to achieve their
desired impact without proper dissemination, implementation, uptake and incentives.
This publication provides guidance to Chinese investors on how to comply with
environmental and social sustainability requirements and additional sustainability
practices in Ethiopia. It breaks down the mandatory requirements and voluntary
guidance and standards relevant to the agroprocessing and light manufacturing sectors
in the country.
The Partnership for Investment and Growth in Africa (PIGA) framework aims to increase
investment-led exports and local development by promoting foreign investments
and business partnerships in two productive sectors, agroprocessing and light
manufacturing, in Ethiopia, Kenya, Mozambique and Zambia. Developed under the
PIGA framework, this handbook also aims to support the implementation of the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
How to use this handbook
Chapter 2 - GET LOCAL
* Get relevant advice to incorporate in your investment practices.
* Learn about the existing legal framework in Ethiopia, as well as which environmental
and labour laws you need to comply with, and where to seek support.
Chapter 3 - TOOLS FOR SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS IMPACT
+ Benefit from guidance on some additional sustainability practices to
maximize sustainable investment and operations.
Why invest sustainably?
The three pillars of sustainability (social, environmental and economic) are
interconnected and interdependent, meaning that a company is unlikely to
achieve long-term economic success without taking into account the social and
environmental factors related to business operations.
Businesses have a key role to play in contributing to the delivery of the 17 SDGs,
which set global priorities and aspirations for 2030 in terms of social, environmental
and economic development.
The Chinese Government is increasingly putting pressure on companies to comply
with environmental and social legislation and to improve reporting on corporate
social responsibility practices.
Sustainable business operations not only support the environment and workers but
also help create strong, long-term business foundations. Implementing measures
that improve working conditions and relationships with the community and
government help companies improve efficiency, develop a better workforce, and
improve their economic performance.
It is important that investors understand and comply with environmental and
labour requirements in the country of operations, but there is also a wide range
of voluntary standards that businesses can adopt to increase sustainability and
international competitiveness.
Legal requirements in Ethiopia
Investors are required to obtain an environmental licence for their proposed
development, which is granted following the successful production and review of an
environmental impact assessment (EIA) or Project Report for low risk projects.
Environmental requirements for the business are determined by the EIA or Project
Report process.
Compliance with EIA requirements and all relevant environmental regulations will be
monitored and businesses are required to submit an environmental audit each year.
Non-compliance with environmental requirements can result in improvement
requirements, which if not followed, can result in closure, imprisonment and
financial penalties.
Labour laws are determined by a range of legislation and it is important that the
company understands and complies with relevant legislation.
Land regulations are also important to consider, particularly in terms of leasing or
purchasing land, where it is vital to ensure that alternative community or tribal rights
are considered and respected.
Understanding additional sustainability practices
There are many opportunities to incorporate additional sustainable measures and
approaches into investment and business operations.
Additional sustainability measures can encompass an array of practices targeting
different sustainability areas such as community relations, labour rights and
resource management.
Voluntary sustainability standards are available for social accountability and
environmental management and for a wide range of sector and industry-specific
processes.
There are networks throughout Africa that can also be a good source of information
and inspiration.
CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 1  Why invest sustainably?
KEY MESSAGES
 Sustainable investment practices require operations that have a minimal negative impact
and maximum positive impact on the global and local environment, community and economy.
At a minimum, this requires ensuring that mandatory environmental and social regulations are
fully addressed and that additional voluntary measures are considered as well.
 The three pillars of sustainability (social, environmental and economic) are interconnected and
interdependent, meaning that a company is unlikely to achieve long-term economic success without
taking into account the social and environmental factors related to business operations.
= Businesses have a key role to play in contributing to the delivery of the United Nations 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), which set global priorities and aspirations for 2030
in terms of social, environmental and economic development.
Basic concepts avoid corruptive practices internally, within their
supply chains and with government stakeholders.
Embedding sustainable investment practices By adopting sustainable investment practices,
into a business means ensuring that mandatory businesses embrace economic, environmental and
environmental and social regulations are social factors in a balanced way to provide a long-
fully addressed while additional sustainability term business foundation that is in harmony with
considerations are implemented from the start the society, local communities and the environment.
of a business, and carried out through its regular These practices create value that goes beyond
operations. Moreover, it means that business economic profits, but also includes social benefits and
operations should be based on principles to reduced environmental impact in the invested country.
-shuttersteck. com
The integration of economic, environmental The three sustainability pillars
and social factors into business and investment
decisions is the foundation of the concept of Figure 1 represents the three pillars of sustainability
sustainability. In the business context, sustainability for investment practices, and their sub-areas. These
refers to the ability of businesses to meet the needs pillars are interconnected and interdependent,
of the present without compromising the ability meaning that long-term economic success of a
of future generations to meet their own needs 2 company cannot exist without taking into account
Sustainability can also relate to the capacity of the social and environmental factors related to
businesses to create long-term value by addressing pysiness operations. Box 1 also describes anti-
environmental and social considerations in their corruption as a complementary and important part
business strategy. of sustainable investment.
Figure 1 The three pillars of sustainability
[ XX)
AAR
SOCIAL:
Human and labour rights
Community relations
Diversity and
equal opportuinities
ENVIRONMENTAL:
Pollution prevention
and climate change
Resource management
Environmental protection
ECONOMIC:
Profit
Cost saving
Economic growth
Social: Proactively managing the positive impact of business operations on people and society.
Environmental: Balancing the way natural resources are used in business operations to maintain an ecological balance.
Economic: Businesses should use resources efficiently and responsibly to create long-term value creation and profitability.
BOX 1: Anti-corruption as a complementary sustainability pillar
Corruption encompasses different illegal and illicit acts such as bribery, extortion, embezzlement and
money laundering. No business can be considered sustainable and/or responsible without embedding
anti-corruption policies in its day-to-day operations. Beyond the three sustainability pillars, companies
should also take into account their business conduct with employees, supply chains, surrounding
communities and government officials. Adopting anti-corruption practices, in this regard, is fundamental
to ensure sustainable investment practices.
 ht Mstock com
The UN Sustainable
Development Goals
More companies worldwide have been integrating
sustainable practices into their investment decisions
and business operations. By doing so, companies
contribute to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development adopted by the United Nations
General Assembly in 2015. This agenda sets a
global development framework composed of
@
GOODHEALTH
AND WELL-BEING
DECENT WORK AND
ECONOMIC GROWTH
13 tox
SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT un,
17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) covering
the three sustainability pillars discussed above.
The 2030 Agenda highlights that private business
activity, investment and innovation are "major
drivers of productivity, inclusive economic growth
and job creation, calls on "all businesses to apply
their creativity and innovation to solve sustainable
development challenges.
CLEAN WATER
AND SANITATION
17 Rwiecous
16 PEACE, JUSTICE
AND STRONG
INSTITUTIONS
1
y,
DEVELOPMENT
GOALS
&
Sustainable investment initiatives of Chinese companies overseas
 The Chinese Government endorses the global call for business action in contributing to the 2030
Agenda, particularly via SDG 17 (partnerships with private actors).
m= The Chinese Government is increasingly putting pressure on companies to comply with environmental
and social legislation and to improve reporting on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) practices.
 The national and international context requires companies to take sustainable practices seriously if
they want to be competitive and retain business.
= Major risks of non-compliance with sustainability requirements include loss of reputation and/or
license to operate in certain markets.
Chinese-owned companies are increasingly
investing overseas, and sub-Saharan Africa is a
focus area for investment in agroprocessing and
light manufacturing. The rapid expansion of Chinese
investments in Africa has attracted global attention.
More than 10,000 Chinese-owned firms operate in
Africa, around 90% of which are privately owned.
In manufacturing, it is estimated that 12% of Africas
industrial production, valued at some $500 billion a
year, is handled by Chinese firms. There is much
debate and discussion on the impact of Chinese
investments on the economies and governance of
African countries, as well as their environmental and
social conditions. Failure to commit to sustainable
practices might generate a negative perception
and threaten the success of Chinese companies in
emerging markets.
China's vision
The Chinese Government explicitly aims for
outbound Chinese investment to contribute to the
realisation of the SDGs and the 2030 Agenda.
For instance, in 2013, the Chinese Government
launched Guidelines for Environmental Protection in
Foreign Investment and Cooperation, which provide
recommendations for companies operating abroad.
This drive for more socially-responsible investment
and operations is also reflected in the Belt and Road
Initiative (BRI). As part of this initiative, China's
Vision and Actions on Jointly Building Silk Road
Economic Belt and 21% Century Maritime Silk Road
paper from 2015 encourages Chinese enterprises
to participate in sustainable industrial investment
in BRI countries. It states that BRI will, "support
localized operation and management of Chinese
companies to boost the local economy, increase
local employment, improve local livelihoods, and
take social responsibilities in protecting local
biodiversity and eco-environment.
More Chinese companies adopt
sustainability practices
In the domestic Chinese market, sustainability
factors are becoming the norm, and are starting
to help define a more successful approach for
business operations. For example, Chinese
companies that have chosen to disclose their
environmental, social and governance (ESG) data
have been producing higher returns than their
peers. Chinese companies ranked in the top 10"
percentile according to their ESG-disclosure score
gained 33% higher returns than their peers in 2018,
according to Bloomberg data, outperforming the
Hang Seng China stock exchange. '?
Starting from 2020, Chinese listed companies will
need to disclose the ESG risks associated with their
operations, following requirements set by the China
Securities Regulatory Commission, in collaboration
with China's Ministry of Environmental Protection. TM
A win-win environment for Chinese
companies going global
Creating a win-win business environment in
alignment with the global development goals
contributes to long-term, sustainable business
operations of Chinese companies operating in any
given country.
In exchange for great opportunities, going global
inevitably means facing various challenges. This
includes a challenging business environment,
the need to understand and comply with
national regulations and accessing or training
an appropriately skilled workforce. " Many of the
sub-Saharan African countries in which Chinese
companies invest have significant development
challenges, with economies constrained by
limitations, including poor infrastructure, and weak
education and health sectors. There are also many
environmental challenges. Fragile ecosystems are
facing huge pressures from the challenges of a
changing climate as well as commercial agriculture,
rapid urbanisation, industrial development and
population growth.
This context underpins the need to invest
sustainably and responsibly in Ethiopia. The country
has consistently demonstrated how business
partnerships between China and Africa can be
mutually beneficial; sustainable investment in the
country is vital for longer-term success of Chinese-
owned companies. If investment is focused on
short-term economic gain, without ensuring that
local communities and economies can benefit,
or with disregard to local environmental and
health issues, companies are likely to suffer from
a serious backlash. This can result in increased
operating costs and security risks, legal disputes
and other challenges. It can also lead to a damaged
reputation among customers and potential loss of
business as a result.
The business case for sustainable investments
= Sustainable measures not only support the environment and workers but also help create strong, long-
term business foundations. Implementing measures that improve working conditions and relationships
with the community and government help companies improve efficiency, develop a better workforce,
and improve their economic performance.
 Failing to ensure robust environmental and social measures, including anti-corruption, can result in
significant backlash and loss of business.
 Fair remuneration helps to retain staff and reduce costs relating to high turnover and repeated training.
= Working with local supply chains can reduce costs and improve quality, as well as enhance the local
economy.
The financial benefits of sustainable investment
usually outweigh the costs. Furthermore,
incorporating sustainability helps business owners
anticipate and reduce risks before they incur
monetary or reputational losses. For example,
investing in workers wellbeing, local communities
and supply chains enables companies to benefit
from a loyal and well-trained workforce, which is
likely to lead to better quality products and higher
economic returns. Moreover, companies can
strengthen their business reputation and economic
foundations by reducing negative environmental
impacts, implementing more efficient production
practices, and managing waste to ensure local
communities can prosper.
The business case for sustainable investment is
compelling for the long-term success of businesses
in African countries. With young populations and
high growth rates, they are set to grow into some of the
world's most dynamic markets in the coming decades.
The key arguments for sustainable investments are
set out below in terms of the business benefits that
come from:
 Operating in an environmentally-responsible
manner;
 Operating in a socially-responsible manner;
m Strengthening local supply chains; and
 |ncreased transparency and reduced corruption.
WE] Ethiopia: Sustainable investment in agroprocessing and light manufacturing
Caring for the environment is
good for business
Responsible environmental practices can serve
to improve the economic bottom-line, strengthen
business reputation, decrease businesses
environmental footprint and ensure a healthier local
ecosystem that benefits and attracts employees.
In fact, environmental responsibility has become
a requirement for many companies that export
their goods to international markets. Buyers are
increasingly introducing codes of conduct related
to environmental and social responsibility for their
suppliers, and requesting them to comply with
third party certification processes. Responsible
environmental management can strengthen a
business reputation with its customers in China,
Europe, North America, and elsewhere.
Implementing resource-efficient practices for waste
management, as well as water and energy use can
also lead to cost savings by reducing the quantity
of inputs needed for production while improving
productivity at the company level. Agriculture in
particular relies on sustainable practices in order to
survive. Long-term investments should strive to ensure
environmental conditions that allow strong crop vields
can continue into the future. Reducing the possible
impact of pesticides on valuable insect populations
and water resources should be a consideration of all
investors in the agroprocessing sector. In general,
those companies that invest sustainably have higher
investor interest, as described in Box 2.
BOX 2: Sustainability performance
and access to finance
Today, the environmental and social impact of
a project is an important assessment indicator
in the due diligence conducted by multilateral
development banks and commercial banks
prior to making investments. The shift to cleaner
production and a low-carbon approach in the
manufacturing and agricultural sectors is also
increasingly rewarded by stronger investor
interest. Companies that are socially responsible
often tend to be more transparent and able
to provide investors with greater levels of
information and therefore more confidence.
Failing to ensure robust environmental measures
can result in significant backlash and loss of
business. For example, in 2013, the Government
of Chad suspended the operations of a Chinese oil
company based in the country after it was found that
their operations had resulted in numerous polluted
waterways and oil spills. Damaging the local
environment can also lead to discontent from the
local government and local community that supplies
labour to the company.
Improving businesses reputation
through a responsible approach
to workers and communities
While conducting research among Chinese-
owned companies in each of the PIGA countries,
it became clear that fair remuneration and labour
conditions can help retain staff and reduce costs
relating to high turnover and repeated training.
There is a strong financial case for firms to invest
in their workforces with fair wages, and provide
skills training that boosts career progression and
employee satisfaction.
While cheap labour is one of the attractive aspects
of investing in many African countries, a sustainable
system must allow workers to benefit from wages that
enable them to purchase food, pay for lodging and
buy basic necessities. Estimating a living wage is often
dependent on the specific country and sector. However,
it is important for companies to help establish operations
whereby their employees are able to meet their own
and their dependents basic needs. This can go beyond
increasing employees wages and include other services,
such as providing meals, transportation, housing, and
education. In addition to increasing the satisfaction and
productivity of workers, these services can have the
added value of improving community relations.
In some factories across sub-Saharan Africa, this
is still not the case. Poverty does not lead to good
productivity. There is increasing evidence that
workers who are paid above average wages will be
more loyal and productive.
Beyond national regulations and labour laws, there
are also many additional sustainability measures
that businesses can put in place to increase the
wellbeing of their workers and the sustainable
development of the communities in which they are
located. Some of the most important are described
in Chapter 3 of this handbook.
 SAUIEIStOCK, Cor:
Beyond the immediate workforce, it is also
important to help bring the local community along
on the journey of investing in their region. Extensive
consultation with local leaders and proactive and
positive communication with community leaders
and media outlets can help to identify and mitigate
potential problems before they escalate. Moreover,
investing in the local community can help develop
a local economy that attracts more businesses
and consumers, thereby expanding the market
of the investors company and the wellbeing and
productivity of local employees.
It is also important to be sensitive to land tenure
in African countries. Land is seen as a family's
most valuable asset. If these issues are not taken
seriously, conflicts are likely to arise between
investors and local communities where they
operate, increasing risks to profitability and
the long-term success of the business. When
resettlement of local residents is required, perhaps
as a result of purchasing a large area of land for
agriculture or industrial use, it is important to follow
appropriate national and international standards.
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)
Resettlement Performance Standards provide a
comprehensive framework for these processes.
Local supply chains reduce
costs and improve quality
Companies investing in Ethiopia can also play a
role in developing local supply chain businesses.
Vertically-integrated supply chains which are
geographically concentrated can have many
benefits in terms of reducing transport costs
for materials in the supply chain, being able to
easily discuss and improve synergies between
manufacturing processes, and developing more of
a recognized cluster and brand around a certain
product. Reducing transportation distances has the
added benefit of reducing the carbon footprint of
products, which can be advertised as an additional
selling point to customers, many of whom are
buying sustainable products at an increasing rate. '
At the same time, encouraging local suppliers
to be part of the value chain can provide market
opportunities for micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises in the local market, where business
and employment is often greatly needed and
appreciated.
Supporting local innovation and entrepreneurship
can also lead to higher quality local supply chains,
particularly over a longer timeframe. Setting
up local subsidiaries or forming collaborative
arrangements with local firms can create significant
benefits for investors in accessing local knowledge
and understanding the political context, while
transferring skills and technology to local partners.
The value of transparency and
anti-corruption policies
Corruption is one of the greatest barriers to social
and economic development in African countries as
reported by Transparency International. " Bribery
practices cause negligence in environmental and
social impact assessment processes as well as
many other situations where compliance with
regulations is bypassed. Bribery is, sometimes,
reported by investors as a necessary part of getting
anything done. However, participating in corrupt
practices, even when pressured to do so by local
government representatives is increasingly risky.
Many firms investing in Africa have come to realize
the self-inflicted damage caused by bribery.
Chinese law has evolved to address key issues
for addressing breaches of legal requirements by
Chinese-owned companies overseas. ' Strong
corporate governance and anti-corruption practice
is important to minimize such risk. It also helps in
the due diligence process when seeking further
investment, and helps to reduce reputational risk.
Legal requirements, voluntary standards and
corporate social responsibility
mA clear distinction can be made between legal requirements, voluntary measures and standards
and additional corporate social responsibility (CSR) initiatives, all of which contribute to sustainable
business.
 [tis important that investors understand and comply with relevant legislation, as summarized in Chapter 2.
 There is a wide range of voluntary standards that businesses can comply with to increase international
competitiveness.
= While business survival is the priority when starting out in a challenging business environment, it is
important to stress that doing anything beyond the national legislation to improve sustainability and
responsibility is better than nothing. There are several low-cost, straightforward measures that can
improve working conditions and sustainable outcomes.
An important part of implementing sustainable
business practices is to understand the difference
between legal requirements, voluntary measures
and standards, and additional CSR initiatives.
Legal requirements: Legislation and
mandatory standards
National legislation (sometimes referred to as
hard law) relating to environmental and social
requirements varies across African countries,
including in Ethiopia. Recognising them and
complying with them is the bare minimum that
businesses must do (more on this in Chapter 2).
Mandatory standards are required by
governments and are mandatory for any product or
service to be legally commercialized in that market.
These standards can cover product or packaging
characteristics, or certain processes that need to
be followed. Examples of these standards are:
technical regulations; sanitary and phytosanitary
measures, including health and safety regulations;
product specifications; labelling requirements;
quality controls; and rules of origin. They differ
depending on the product and the country of
export. Non-compliance with these requirements
may lead to quarantining or product rejection by
import countries.
Ethiopia: Sustainable investment in agroprocessing and light manufacturing [ENN
Integrating voluntary
sustainability standards
Over the last decade, a new generation of voluntary
sustainability standards (sometimes referred to
as soft law) has emerged to cover all sectors and
industries. These include voluntary guidelines,
initiatives, codes and standards developed by
international organisations, companies, business
associations, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), governments and multistakeholder
initiatives. They provide additional guidelines for
sustainable business practices. Demonstrating
adherence to these standards is often necessary for
businesses to operate profitably in global markets.
The wide range of voluntary standards include the
following schemes:
 |nternational governance agreements and
guidelines such as:
= The International Labour Organization (ILO)
Multinational Enterprises (MNE) Declaration
= The Organisation for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) Guidelines for
Multinational Enterprises?
 The Global Compact, established by the UN? !
 Guiding Principles on Business and Human
Rights, established by the UN Human Rights
Office of the High Commissioner (OHCHR). ? ?
= |nternational multistakeholder initiatives providing
standards for the social and environmental
practices of firms at home and abroad.
This includes standards developed by the
International Organization for Standardization
(ISO), such as the ISO 26000 standard Guidance
on Social Responsibility launched in 2010.
= Private voluntary sustainability standards
providing principles and/or requirements that
producers, traders, manufacturers, retailers
or service providers may be asked to meet,
covering different sustainability metrics.
 Hundreds of industry association codes are
in existence, covering major areas of national
and international commercial activity including
manufacturing and agriculture.
= Thousands of company codes with specific
policies on social and environmental issues,
particularly among multinational corporations.
The proliferation of voluntary sustainability standard
schemes can cause challenges, particularly for
companies operating in value chains that may be
compelled to comply with numerous voluntary
standard schemes that have potentially high costs
to demonstrate compliance.
This has led to standard schemes often being
perceived by Chinese companies as a barrier
to market entry or a complication that can be
avoided. Many Chinese companies do not engage
with these voluntary standard schemes because
of unfamiliarity with the rules of the game, weak
networks with relevant organisations, and a lack of
guidance.
However, this approach could impede Chinese
enterprises international competitiveness in a
market that increasingly demands environmental
sustainability and social responsibility. ? It is more
likely that Chinese companies will become a force
in shaping the next generation of sustainability
standards in global markets, as a competitive
edge aligned with China's broader global policies
on sustainable development. ? Many investors are
convinced that promoting prudent and sustainable
business practices, in line with both national
regulations and voluntary standards, makes
economic sense in the long term.
An additional point is that many national
governments are increasingly using the dynamic
space of voluntary standards as a testing ground for
how they could inform mandatory requirements.
It is therefore better to be aware of and be able to
comply with a wide range of voluntary social and
environmental standards, in order to be prepared to
meet legal requirements as they are introduced.
A further distinction can be made for additional
CSR activities. For the purpose of this handbook,
CSR is defined as activities or initiatives that are
outside of the core business activities, and include
initiatives such as improving sustainable access
to drinking water for local communities, and
contributing to education or healthcare facilities
and resources. Additional CSR initiatives can help
local communities to develop, and support cultural
events that are vital to engagement, integration and
mutual understanding between investors and local
communities.
Research suggests that a high proportion of
Chinese enterprises investing overseas are already
aware of the positive impacts of CSR initiatives. ?
Interviews carried out with Chinese companies
to inform this handbook found that many of them
consider CSR an important part of Chinese culture
to give something to the communities in which
they work.
A company can achieve significant positive
reputational benefits from implementing CSR
initiatives. However, it is important that businesses
do not use CSR as a cover to hide unsustainable
business operations. It is also important that CSR
initiatives are based on or compliant with national
development strategies in the host country.
Throughout the different processes to set up their
business, companies are expected to comply with
legal sustainability requirements established by
the country, and adopt additional sustainability
measures to mitigate potential sustainability impacts
of their business operations. Figure 2 summarizes
the main legal sustainability requirements and
additional sustainability considerations that
companies should adhere to during the three
key stages of business operations.
Legal requirements and additional sustainability considerations throughout
business operations
LEGAL
REQUIREMENTS
ADDITIONAL SUSTAINABILITY
CONSIDERATIONS
 Follow environmental
impact assessment (EIA)
process to obtain
environmental license
Comply with land-use plans
and land-related laws
Comply with all other
environmental legislation
Comply with labour laws
Obtain appropriate work
permits and registrations
Ensure health and safety
of workers
 When doing site selection,
take into account the
potential environmental
impact of transport-related
emissions, opportunities
to link to local backward
and forward supply
chains, including for food
and materials
Consult community
representatives to
understand the local
context and plan
accordingly
Join a local business
association
requirements set out in
the EIA
Carry out environmental
audits, as required by
environmental authorities
Consider providing in-kind
benefits for employees,
such as accommodation,
transport, meals
Respect cultural
differences
Invest in local skills and
managers
 Communicate clearly with
staff and local
communities to build trust
Consider additional CSR
projects for local
communities
Consider green and clean
methods of production
When exiting a site or
land use, submit
decommissioning plan
to the appropriate
environmental authority
Implement approved
decommissioning works
to remediate negative
impacts
Comply with bankruptcy
and liquidation laws in
terms of paying staff and
suppliers
Communicate clearly with
staff and stakeholders on
process and timing
Consult with community
groups that may be
impacted
Prepare and implement
a sustainable closing
strategy
Consider carrying out a
post-investment
evaluation and feed
lessons back into
subsequent projects
Areas of concern for sustainability
Table 1 provides an overview of different sustainability areas and sub-areas of concern for investors.
Every project, sector and national context is unique and should be evaluated as such. Regardless of the
sector, investors must ensure they properly engage with the local workforce and the environment, and that
their business conduct is ethical. As such, Table 1 illustrates some examples of issues that merit closer
investigation by the investor.
Table 1 Sustainability areas of concern
Please list any issues
EXAMPLES OF ISSUES of concern for your
company
AREA OF CONCERN | SUB-AREA OF
CONCERN
ENVIRONMENTAL
Pollution Air, emissions and =m Use of old technclogies, vehicles and
prevention and climate machineries and intensive use of fossil fuels
climate change  Inefficient resource use in farming and
mitigation agroprocessing sites.
= Overuse of pesticide application, fertilisation,
and slash-and-burn agriculture
Waste Solid waste:
(solid and water = No system to record waste produced in
waste) processing operations.
= Toxic chemicals and pollutants are released
directly on surface and ground waters
= Production facility is not connected to sewage
network
Wastewater:
m |nexistence of system to dispose of and store
grey water
m |nexistence of system to recycle wastewater
Resource Inputs, chemical use ~~  Lack of metres to monitor the consumption of
management energy, water and other inputs in production
processes
= Water, chemical leakages in pipe system
Fresh water m | ack of systems to identify, monitor and
resources maintain fresh water resources impacted by
production
= Over extraction of groundwater resources
= Waterlogging and scil salinization due to
unsustainable agricultural practices
 |nexistence of water management system
Energy and minerals ~~  Inadequate facilities to stock fuel
Absence or poorly insulated systems of energy
distribution
Improperly vented appliances
Ventilation and air leakage
Inefficient heating systems
No energy management system in place
Lack of company interest to adopt renewable
energy sources (solar, wind, biomass, etc. )
= Reliance on inefficient diesel generators for
energy supply during power outages or in the
absence of connection to national grid
Land and soil m Soil erosion, desertification and/or
management contamination due to overuse, salinization,
acidification, or other chemical soil
contamination
m | ack of strategies to measure, monitor and
prevent soil contamination and pollution
SUB-AREA OF
AREA OF CONCERN CONCERN
Environmental Forests
protection
Biodiversity
SOCIAL
EXAMPLES OF ISSUES
of concern for your
Lack of procedures in place to prevent and/or
remediate deforestation
Lack of procedures for the regeneration
of depleted forests and woodlands
Lack of forest management plan and/or
a reliable monitoring system
No systems in place to ensure that timber is
of legal origin
Lack of processes to ensure that products are
not harvested at levels above sustainable yields
Lack of systems in place to identify, restore and
rehabilitate natural habitats and/or ecosystems
Environmental impacts observed as a result of
production and harvesting operations
Lack of procedures in place to address land-
use planning and identification of conservation
priorities
Human and labour
rights
Health and safety
Forced labour
Child labour
Freedom of
association/collective
bargaining
Ethiopia
Lack of training on health and safety practices
for workers
Lack of monitoring and controlling systems to
prevent health and safety hazards
Workers are exposed to hazardous substances
without any protective equipment
Inappropriate working space
Improper handling, labelling and storage of
hazardous materials
Lack of evacuation plans in case of
emergencies
Workplace violence including physical assault,
sexual and moral harassment
Physical threats or applying penalties to
workers that refuse to work
Retention of workers passports or other identity
papers
Withholding pay (debt bondage) under the
pretence that workers owe recruitment fees or
costs of transportation to the company
Employing children below the legal working age
in the country. *Note that different minimum
ages apply to certain types of work (e. g. light
work, hazardous work)
Trafficking of children and related exploitation
as workers
Workers are not allowed to form and join trade
unions
Discrimination against workers that are union
members or those willing to join a union/
The employer promotes a particular union or
workers association, and/or coerces workers to
join it or leave cne
The employer does not participate in collective
bargaining agreements, and/or does not
adhere to the agreed outcomes
Workers are not allowed to be represented in
collective bargaining by a union of their choice
Inexistence of procedures for the prevention
and resolution of workplace conflicts or
grievances
: Sustainable investment in agroprocessing and light manufacturing
30 rl ~ -
AREA OF CONCERN CONCERN EXAMPLES OF ISSUES of concern for your
Community = | ack of consultation/engagement with local
relations communities living around the company
regarding changes or impacts from business
activities on local resources and communities.
It includes issues related to land management,
safety, human rights violations, environmental
impacts on the nature and community health
among others.
m | ack or poor grievance mechanism tc provide
fair compensation for negative impacts
of operations on local communities and
individuals
Diversity and Discrimination related ~~ Any distinction, exclusion or preferential treatment
equal opportunities to employment and of workers or candidates to a position based on:
occupation Gender
Race or skin colour
Sex
Religion
Political opinion
Age
National or social origin, nationality
Sexual orientation
HIV/AIDS status
Disability
Trade union membership or activities
Workers with family responsibilities
Lack of paternity and maternity leave policies
ANTI-CORRUPTION
= Influencing government officials through the
payment of bribes
m Accepting to pay bribes to government officials
in order to access services
m | ack of training for workers and company
management on anti-corruption practices
= Retaliation against whistle blowers
m | ack of mitigation procedures against bribery
and other types of corruption (e. g. nepotism,
extortion, patronage, among others)
CHAPTER 2  Sustainability requirements in Ethiopia
= |nvestors are required to obtain an environmental license for their proposed development, which is
granted following the successful production and review of an environmental impact assessment (EIA)
or Project Report for low risk projects.
= Environmental requirements for the specific business are determined by the EIA or Project Report
process.
= Compliance with EIA requirements and all relevant environmental regulations will be monitored and
businesses are required to submit an environmental audit each year, depending on the details of the
national legislation.
= Non-compliance with environmental requirements can result in improvement requirements, which if not
followed, can result in closure, imprisonment and financial penalties.
= | abour laws are determined by a range of legislation and it is important that the company understands
and complies with relevant legislation.
 | and regulations are also important to consider, particularly in terms of leasing or purchasing land,
where it is vital to ensure that alternative community or tribal rights are considered and respected.
When investing in manufacturing or agroprocessing in Ethiopia, it is very important to comply with the
national legislation in matters relating to environmental management and working conditions for employees.
The following section provides an overview of general principles applicable for investors in any country and
specific legal requirements in Ethiopia.
 shutterstock. com  shutterstock. com
 shutterstock. com
General principles
= Do not ask favours from influential government
representatives to shortcut processes. This is
likely to lead to compliance problems at a later
stage. Ensure that you speak to the relevant
government departments and follow their
guidance and requirements.
= Do not rely exclusively on companies already
working in the country for second-hand
knowledge that may be out of date or inaccurate.
Make sure you understand what is required from
relevant government departments.
 [tis usually necessary to hire the right
specialist (i. e. individual consultant or firm) to
undertake a project brief, environmental impact
assessment (EIA), * environmental audit, or a
decommissioning plan to ensure an objective
assessment process. Environmental institutions
in Ethiopia maintain lists of registered qualified
professional companies or individual experts who
can provide these services.
 Ensure that sufficient time is allocated for the EIA
process. Engage with the relevant environmental
agency as soon as you register a business. Six
to 12 months is a reasonable timeframe for a full
EIA, including public consultation and review,
improvements and approval by the appropriate
environmental authority, at which point an
environmental license can be granted for the
proposed investment.
Comply with land use plans where they have
been developed on a participatory basis and
passed into law to guide spatial development
of a region or urban area.
Understand if there are differences between
the Chinese and local method for defining basic
salary and remuneration packages. Confusion
in this area could lead to a failure to comply with
local labour laws.
= Try to obtain national legislation translated into
Chinese, as well as useful publications and
updates on changes to legislation requirements,
which are often produced by Chinese business
associations. However, remain aware that these
can become outdated. Speaking directly to the
relevant government department is usually best.
m Specific regulations may be negotiated for the
operations of a particular business, with a trade
union body representing your workers, which
would subsequently be reflected in a legally-
binding collective bargaining agreement.
Ethiopia: Legal environmental and labour requirements
When setting up a business in Ethiopia, during operations or when decommissioning a site due to closure
or relocation, there is a set of environmental and labour regulations a company must follow. These are
summarized below, with clear references to relevant legislation.
Country background
Ethiopia is striving to become a manufacturing
hub in Africa and has made progress in attracting
foreign direct investment. The country has a handful
of operational industrial parks, which host a range
of manufacturers from China, Europe and North
America. According to the Government of Ethiopia,
over 270 Chinese-owned companies were active in
Ethiopia during the period 2011 to 2017, mainly in
the manufacturing sector, generating revenues of
over $500 million and creating 28,000 local jobs.
With a total area of about 1.1 million km? of arable
land, Ethiopia also has tremendous potential for
agricultural development. For the moment, only
around 20% of this arable land is being cultivated.
Language: Ethiopia is a multi-ethnic state with
more than 80 languages and 200 dialects. Amharic
is the working language of the federal government,
but English, Oromiffa and Tigrigna are also widely
spoken in the government and businesses.
Ethnic differences and regional politics:
Ethiopia is a federal system with nine regional
provinces. These provinces are broadly aligned
with ethnic divisions. Within and across provincial
boundaries, there are also many subdivisions.
This context is important to understand.
Environmental regulations and
guidelines
The following environmental regulations must
be observed in Ethiopia:
= Environmental Policy of Ethiopia (1997); %
 Environmental Impact Assessment
Proclamation (2002);
= Environmental Pollution Control
Proclamation (2002); %
 Regulation to Provide for the Prevention of
Industrial Pollution (2008); %
 Solid Waste Management Proclamation
(2007).
Environmental impact
assessments
Investors must comply with the following overall
environmental management requirements as they
set up, operate and decommission a business.
1. Obtaining an environmental license for
a proposed investment
An investor is not permitted to implement a
project until: 1) a Project Brief or an environmental
impact assessment (EIA) has been concluded in
accordance with Ethiopia's Environment Impact
Assessment Proclamation; 2) the investor receives
a decision letter from the Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (ESIA) Directorate of the federal
or regional Environmental Protection Authority (EPA).
Investors are first required to make contact with
the Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) which
will advise the investor on the appropriate route
for obtaining an environmental license. A list of
proposed projects that require an EIA is included
in the EIA Proclamation, subject to the discretion
of the ESIA Directorate. The ESIA Directorate
takes into account the context and environmental
sensitivity of the proposed site location and nature
of proposed operations. Whether or not a proposed
project requires an ESIA will be determined by a
robust screening process, to be undertaken by the
ESIA Directorate, based on information provided by
the investor.
For investments that are categorized as low risk,
it is sufficient to produce a project report setting out
best practice procedures to minimize environmental
impact.
Below are the requirements for projects that require
an ESIA.
m Selection of qualified EIA lead experts or firm
of experts registered by the EPA. The Authority
maintains a register of accredited experts
available in federal and regional EPA offices.
 Based on the agreed terms of reference and
EIA regulations, the investor will appoint one or
more independent experts or a firm of experts to
undertake the EIA.
 The EIA process includes stakeholder and local
community consultation. Where local populations
may require relocation, for particularly large
projects, appropriate resettlement provisions are
to be followed, ideally based on IFC standards.
= On completion of the EIA, a report is submitted to
the EPA head office, duly signed by the investor
and the EIA experts involved in assessment
preparation.
= The EIA report will then be sent to lead agencies
for internal review and harmonization on decision
making.
 Decision making by the EPA takes a maximum of
30 days for a project report, and 60 days for EIA
study reports (from the date of submission to the
EPA).
2. Environmental audit to assess compliance
with requirements
Any investments that have been approved by the
EIA process and commissioned for operations are
required to undertake an environmental audit (EA).
There is provision for up to two per year in the
legislation and the first is usually required in the
first three to six months.
Below are the requirements relating to an
environmental audit.
m Selection of qualified environmental audit (EA)
lead experts or firm of experts registered by the
EPA. The EPA maintains a register of experts,
available in EPA offices in Addis Ababa or
regional headquarters.
 Based on an agreed terms of reference and
EIA/EA regulations, appointed experts or firm of
experts undertake the environmental audit.
On completion, an environmental audit report is
submitted to the appropriate authority (i. e. federal
or regional office), duly signed by the investor
and the Environmental Audit experts involved in
the preparation of the report.
The report then undergoes internal review
procedures and harmonization for decision
making within 30 days from the date of
submission to the EPA.
Improvement orders may be served, which can
oblige an investor to rectify any non-compliance
with the requirements set out in the original EIA
or subsequently agreed requirements.
Failure to comply with improvement orders can
result in a fine, imprisonment and site closure.
An environmental audit is required each year
during operations, following the same process as
set out above.
Throughout the period of business operations,
investors are required to comply with all relevant
regulations and guidelines listed in the box above.
. Decommissioning a site
A decommissioning plan is required as part of
the initial EIA. As the decommissioning process
may happen many years later, at the time of
closure, an updated decommissioning plan must
be prepared and submitted to the EPA.
The EPA will then advise the business on
improvements to the plan, which in turn
must be implemented by the business. A full
decommissioning report must be submitted to
the EPA upon completion of the remediation
works, detailing evidence of compliance with the
measures set out in the decommissioning plan.
(@shuiterstock com
Labour laws and workplace
provisions
The following labour legislation must be
observed in Ethiopia:
 | abour Proclamation (2019); %
m Constitution of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia; *
m= National Policy on Occupational Health and
Safety (2019); %
= Civil Code Proclamation (1960);
 Social Health Insurance Proclamation
(2010);
 Private Organization Employees Pension
Proclamation (2011);
 Urban Lands Lease Holding Proclamation
(2011); %
 Rural Land Administration and Land Use
Proclamation (2005). %
Summary of key labour law
Many other laws and conditions are specified in
the legislations above and each investor should
ensure that they understand and comply with what
is relevant to their business.
Minimum wage: There is no national minimum
wage in Ethiopia as of 2019 but the government
has established a Wage Board, comprising of
representative of the government, employees
and trade unions, and other stakeholders that
will periodically revise minimum wages based
on studies which take into account the countrys
economic development, labour market and other
considerations.
Working hours:
= 8 hours/ day, and 48 hours/ week
 |f the nature of work so requires, some working
days can be shortened while in other cases,
working time can be increased to a maximum
of 12 hours/ day.
Overtime:
= A worker may not be compelled to work overtime
except in case of accident, force majeure, urgent
work, or substitution of absent workers assigned
to work that runs continuously without interruption.
= Overtime work may not exceed 4 hours in a day
or 12 hours in a week. the max monthly and
annual hours were removed from this legislation.
= Overtime is to be compensated in accordance
with the categories outlined in the Labour
Proclamation No. 1156-2019. This requires
overtime work is paid at 1.75 the daily hourly rate.
Rest days: Workers are entitled to 24 consecutive
hours of rest per week. Labour law requires that
weekly rest day, in principle, should be Sunday for
all employees. If it is impossible to provide a weekly
rest day on Sunday, due to the nature of the work,
the rest day can fall on another day of the week.
Weekly rest must include a full 24-hour period, from
6:00 to 6:00 the next day.
Paid leave: A worker is entitled to 16 days of paid
annual leave on completion of one year of service
plus one working day for every 2 years of additional
service.
Paid public holidays: Workers are entitled to
paid public and religious holidays. These holidays
are: Ethiopian Christmas (7 January); Orthodox
Epiphany (Timket) (19 January); Victory of Adwa
(2 March); Ethiopian Good Friday (18 April);
Ethiopian Easter (20 April); International Labour Day
(1 May); Patriot's Victory Day (5 May); Downfall of
the Derg (28 May); Eid al-Fitre (End of Ramadan);
Ethiopian New Year (11 September); Meskel
(Discovery of the True Cross) (27 September);
and Moulid (Birthday of Prophet Muhammad)
(10 November). Muslim religious holidays are based
on the lunar calendar.
Maternity leave: Women employees are entitled to
fully paid maternity leave of 120 consecutive days
(30 days antenatal and 90 days postnatal).
Nursing: There is no provision requiring employers
to provide breaks or facilities to nursing mothers,
but investors can consider voluntarily providing
appropriate conditions.
Paternity leave: A man employee is entitled to
three consecutive days of paternity leave with full
pay. A worker shall be entitled to leave without
pay for up to five consecutive days in the case of
exceptional and serious events. However, such
leave may be granted only twice in a budget year.
Sick leave: Ethiopia's Labour Proclamation
provides for paid sick leave for up to six months
on completion of a probation period if sickness is
certified by a qualified doctor. During the first month
of sick leave, employees are entitled to 100% of
their wages. For the next two months, they are
entitled to 50% of their wages, and the last three
months of sick leave are without pay.
Absence from work/compassionate leave:
An employee is entitled to up to five consecutive
days of leave with pay, two times per year for
exceptional and serious events (see Chapter 2
of Ethiopia's 2019 Labour Proclamation).
Medical insurance: All workers are required to be
a member of a social health insurance scheme as
explained in Ethiopia's 2010 Social Health Insurance
Proclamation.
Work injuries: Work injuries are divided into
four categories: (i) permanent total incapacity;
(iy permanent partial incapacity; (iii) temporary
incapacity; and (iv) fatal injury leading to death of a
worker. They must be compensated in accordance
with the relevant legislation (i. e. the 2019 Labour
Proclamation, and the 2011 Private Organization
Employees Pension Proclamation).
Disability rights: Ethiopia is a signatory of
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, and the countrys Labour Proclamation
establishes that it is prohibited to discriminate
between employees on the basis of disability.
Occupational health and safety requirements:
Employers must ensure compliance with Part 7 of
The 2019 Labour Proclamation and the National
Policy on Occupational Health and Safety, which
provide provisions and standards for securing a
safe and healthy working environment. lt is the
responsibility of every employer to ensure the safety,
health and welfare of all employees at work. It is
important to develop a safety and health-conscious
culture in the work place, and encourage reporting
of injuries and accidents.
Local content requirements: * There are no local
content requirements relating to light manufacturing
or agroprocessing.
Trade unions: The employer is also obliged to
deduct union dues from the employee's regular
wage and transfer the cash into the trade union's
bank account, if requested by the employee.
Preventing child labour: It is prohibited to employ
a person less than 15 years of age. Employers must
comply with restrictions on overtime and hours of
work for young workers (between the ages of 15
and 18) in Article 89 of the Labour Proclamation.
Labour inspection: The Labour Proclamation
provides for labour inspection services, which can
be used for the purpose of planned and follow-up
inspections, complaint-based, or accident-based
inspections.
Penalties for non-compliance of employers:
There are a variety of penalties set out in the
legislation for employers who fail to comply with the
relevant legislation.
Resolving workplace disputes: Disputes may be
settled via Ethiopia's Labour Courts or by alternative
lawful means (see Chapters 2 and 3 of the Labour
Proclamation).
Ownership rights to land and other assets on land:
In Ethiopia all land is owned by the state, but is
leased to individuals, communities and businesses.
Even if the government leases land to a company
for an industrial site or agricultural land, the
underlying community claims to the land may not
be aligned. Independent consultation with local
communities, usually as part of the EIA process is
therefore vital for sustainable community relations.
Summary checklist
Figure 3 provides a checklist of the environmental and social requirements to be considered by potential
investors in the agroprocessing and light manufacturing sectors in Ethiopia. The different steps included
in the checklist refer to different categories of procedures that investors need to undertake in order to
obtain their investment certificate and start running their business.
Figure 3 Checklist: Ethiopias environmental and labour requirements for investors
Legend of icons per investment stage:
No legal labour and No legal labour and Investors need to comply
environmental requirements environmental requirements with legal labour and
set at the investment stage. are set at this stage, environmental requirements
however investors should at this stage.
take into account certain
1. Business opportunities for investing in Ethiopia
No legal labour and environmental requirements are set at this stage for investors considering opening up business in
Ethiopia. Nonetheless, investors should take into consideration the following aspects:
= Collect prior information about the labour legal system and environmental regulation in Ethiopia.
= Understand which sustainability areas will be impacted by the investment and include this analysis in project design.
= Understand the social, environmental, economic and political context of the invested country. Refer to the Ethiopian
Investment Commission official website,  Chinese web-portal, I-Guide websiteTM and Investment Guide" for more
information.
2. Investment permit and business registration through the Ethiopia Investment Commission
Ethiopia.
3. Land acquisition
QO
The prevailing land holding system in Ethiopia is lease. As a result, an application for land has to be made to the concerned
regional land administration office or through the sub-lease of an existing lease. Among the documents to be submitted
by investors when applying to land, is an environmental impact assessment report or letter, depending on the project's
environmental risk level.
Other documents that should be submitted by investors are:
= An investment permit issued by the Ethiopian Investment Commission or any other mandated governmental
organization;
= Afeasibility study/business plan;
= Asupporting letter from the Ethiopian Investment Commission or other mandated governmental organization.
After the application is processed and approved, a land lease agreement is signed between the investor and the land
administration office.
Lease agreement: Lease agreements can be concluded with an industrial park development corporation, regional/woreda
land administration office, or a private industrial park developer.
Relevant legislation: Urban Lands Lease Holding Proclamation (No. 721/2011), Rural Land Administration and Land Use
Proclamation (No. 456/2005).
Institutions involved: Documents Authentication and Registration Agency
4. Construction permit
Construction permits are issued at various administrative levels, such as district, municipality, or ministry levels, depending
on the location of the construction.
Q
An application for a permit must be made at the urban administration or designated organ at the construction location. The
application should contain the following:
= Full name and address of the applicant;
= |nvestment permit;
= | ocation of construction;
= Table showing the total floor area;
= Planning consent;
= Architectural, sanitary, soil test, electrical designs and structural analysis report for the planned building.
5. Issuance of business license
6. Issuance of environmental impact assessment clearance
= Relevant legislation for a Project Brief or environmental impact assessment (EIA): Environmental Impact Assessment
Proclamation
Institutions involved in the process: Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC), Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
(ESIA) of the federal or regional Environmental Protection Authority (EPA)
7. Issuance of customs duty exemptions
8. Work permits
The Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) issues work permits to expat employees hired by companies that are in the
investment project implementation phase. An application accompanied by the following documents should be submitted to
the Commission:
Q 
= Work visa,
= Authenticated education, experience and competence certificates;
= Completed and signed application form.
Relevant legislations: Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs directives on issuance of work permits for expat employees
(December 23/2011 E. C). %2
Institutions involved in the process: EIC (Licensing and Registration Department} and the Ministry of Labor and Social
Affairs.
9. Business visa
No legal social and environmental requirements are set at this stage for investors considering opening up business in
10. Legal considerations after commencement of business operations
Environment:
= Environmental audit to assess compliance with requirements established by the EIA
Relevant legislation: Environmental Impact Assessment Proclamation
= Decommissioning a site at closure
Institution involved in the process: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the Federal or Regional
Environmental Protection Authority (EPA)
Labour:
= Investors should comply with all relevant legislations mentioned above
Institution involved in the process: Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs
hutterstock. com
Government institutions most relevant to sustainable investment
The following institutions define and monitor the environmental and labour requirements with which
investing companies need to comply.
Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC):
The EIC is responsible for investment promotion
of foreign companies in Ethiopia. It also provides
services such as: issuing investment permits,
business licenses and investment licenses for
construction contracting; issuing commercial
registration certificates as well as renewals,
amendments, replacements or cancellations;
registering technology transfer agreements and
export-oriented non-equity-based foreign enterprise
collaborations with domestic investors; providing
a hand-holding service for investors during the
acquisition of land and utilities (water, electrical
power and telecom services); and supporting the
submission of environmental impact assessment
studies for investment projects.
Website (available in Chinese):
www. investethiopia. gov. et/index. php
Address: Dembel Center, Bole Road,
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Phone: +251 11 551 0033
Email: info@ethio-invest. com
Industrial Parks Development Corporation
(IPDC): The IPDC is responsible for providing
serviced industrial land, pre-built sheds equipped
with all-encompassing utilities, and infrastructural
facilities that fit international standards, without
compromising workers security and environmental
safety. In collaboration with the Ethiopian
Investment Commission, Ethiopian Revenue and
Customs Authority and several other institutions,
the IPDC provides a comprehensive service
for investors coming into industrial parks. This
includes a full account of environmental and social
regulations with which companies must comply.
Website: www. ipdc. gov. et/index. php/en/
Address: Bishangari Building, Comoros Street,
Opposite to Kenyan Embassy, Addis Ababa,
Phone: +251-11 661 6986
+251 11 661 6674
+251 91 181 3027
Email: admin. info@ipdc. gov. et
Environmental Protection Commission (EPC):
EPC is responsible for ensuring the realisation of
the environmental rights, goals, objectives and
basic principles enshrined in the Constitution, as
well as the Environment Policy of Ethiopia. This is
done through coordinating appropriate measures,
establishing systems, developing programmes
and mechanisms for the welfare of humans and
the safety of the environment. EPC is mandated
to formulate, initiate and coordinate strategies,
policies, laws and standards, and monitor and
enforce their implementation. It is also responsible
for the synergistic implementation and follow-
up of international and regional environmental
agreements. The Environmental Protection Authority
(EPA) is the body under the EPC that is responsible
for the EIA process and checking the compliance of
companies with their environmental management
requirements, via the environmental audit process.
Website: www. epa. govet
http: //mefcc. gov. et
Address: Arat Killo, Behind Tourist Hotel,
Phone: +251 111 704 214
+251 111 704 251
Email: info@mefcc. gov. et
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs:
The Ministry's mandate includes maintaining
employee health and safety in the work place,
improving working condition and environment,
and promoting efficient and equitable employment
services, as well as maintaining developmental
social welfare of all citizens.
Website: www. molsa. gov. et
Address: Kirkos Kifle Ketema, Wereda 8, Kazanchis
Phone: +251 11 551 7080
+251 11 551 5249
+251 11 551 8396
+251 11 551 5316
+251 11 550 1220
Email: molsa@molsa. gov. et
National development strategies
= Growth and Transformation Plan Il (GTP II)
m Ethiopian Industrial Development Strategic Plan (2013-2025)
m Fthiopia's Climate Resilient Green Economy Strategy
Sector-specific strategies
m | eather sector strategy
 Pharmaceutical sector strategy
 Garment strategy
Food and beverage sector strategy 
Horticulture sector strategy
CHAPTER 3
Additional sustainability
measures
Lo
 shilitterstock gem
CHAPTER 3  Additional sustainability measures
ADDITIONAL SUSTAINABILITY MEASURES
 Beyond the legal requirements set out in Chapter 2, there are many opportunities to incorporate
additional sustainable measures and approaches into investment and business operations.
= Additional sustainability measures can encompass an array of practices targeting different
sustainability areas such as community relations, labour rights and resource management.
= Voluntary sustainability standards are available for social accountability and environmental
management and for a wide range of sector and industry-specific processes.
 There are business networks and groups throughout Africa that can also be a good source of
information and inspiration on sustainable investment practices.
Apart from compliance with national regulations, there are many opportunities for companies to incorporate
more sustainable approaches into their operations, particularly in light manufacturing and agroprocessing
businesses.
This chapter introduces a number of measures that companies can incorporate into their business operations
in Ethiopia, to help implement a sustainable approach (summarized in Figure 4). Relevant Chinese and
international voluntary standards are also highlighted at the end of the chapter.
Figure 4 Additional measures for sustainable business conduct
ry Co VN
Pyle] Site selection aligned with Advice from local governments
sustainability
 . . .
Investing in local skills and managers = Closing strategy aligned with
( ] sustainabiltiy
=D
&, Corporate social responsility strategy
ip
7 2
nS Use of resources A Communications and public relations
A
=
os  Building the skills and capacity &= Engaging with the local business
(== | of local partner companies = 0p community
@ish Utter stock. com
Site selection aligned with
LYS - a1
LV)
Investors are encouraged to consider the location
of their proposed manufacturing or agroprocessing
site in the context of sustainable development
factors. These include the following:
= Connecting to upstream and/or downstream
local value chains. There may be opportunities
to maximize the benefits to local businesses,
farmers or producers of different supplies
and materials such as food, building and
raw materials. This can often have significant
business advantages such as lower costs for
materials or transport, and improved relations
between investors and surrounding communities.
= Taking a proactive approach to addressing
land-related challenges. Land rights can
involve complex procedures in many countries.
Even if companies follow the national laws on
land compensation, there is still likely to be
backlash from local communities, if they feel
unfairly compensated or treated. It is advisable
for companies to do their own due diligence, and
speak to local community leaders in addition
to local and national governments. It is most
appropriate to consider this in detail at the EIA
stage.
Investors have a unique opportunity to develop
sustainable approaches in the production or
manufacturing of products. Beyond the legislation
discussed in Chapter 2, it is possible to implement
processes that minimize electricity or water use,
minimize greenhouse gas emissions such as CO,
or develop circular economy systems that minimize
wastage. This could include the following:
= Implementing systems to capture and reuse rain
water;
 Having good maintenance systems to prevent
leakage and water waste;
= Maximizing the energy efficiency of machinery,
lighting and buildings;
 Considering how groundwater supplies may
be limited, and are shared with the surrounding
community, as well as practicing the sustainable
use of water sourced from boreholes.
= Adopting processing/manufacturing practices
that avoid waste and reusing inputs, or whenever
not possible, recycling waste appropriately.
 Reducing emissions and pollution from
manufacturing processes and vehicles, and by
minimizing other activities such as burning waste
materials.
= Minimizing the carbon footprint of a business,
through the measures above, as well as by
adopting renewable energy sources and
sourcing food and materials from local suppliers.
= Minimizing the use of pesticides and fertilizers, as
some may have negative impacts on surrounding
water quality and the health of human and animal
populations.
m Using biofertilizers if possible, which are
designed to reduce the harmful impacts of
fertilizers on the environment while providing
similar benefits to crops. .
yy
ER Working conditions
Providing workers with better conditions and
opportunities can lead to benefits such as higher
levels of productivity, low levels of staff turnover and
financial savings. Investors can consider developing
a living wage for employees through an array of
measures that may include adequate wages,
housing, food, transportation, education and
childcare, communication, and health benefits.
= Providing local transport for workers to and
from their place of employment can provide
a safe and efficient additional benefit to workers.
Workers may often need to walk between home
and work, so reducing the distance will also
improve punctuality and energy levels at work.
It will also improve safety, particularly if workers
need to travel after dark.
= Providing meals and areas to eat for workers
can help boost productivity. As discussed in
Chapter 1, many workers on low wages struggle
to buy enough nutritious food. Providing workers
with good quality food at the workplace can help
to improve morale and productivity as well as
fostering longer-term loyalty.
= Companies should consider investing
in accommodation and communication
capacities for workers. Where a business
wishes to invest for a long duration, a case can
be made for providing housing for workers,
which can significantly reduce staff turnover and
increase productivity. In order to pass supply
chain audits, accommodation must comply
with international standards such as the ILO
standards for worker accommodation.
It is important to ensure that housing plans fit into
local spatial development plans, where relevant.
It can also be beneficial to provide means of
communication for workers, especially in cases
where many have travelled far from home to
work in a factory or industrial zone. Providing
employees with phone cards or having a
company phone that can be used by employees
on a regular basis can help them stay in contact
with their families.
= Employers can also play a role in
improving the safety and security of
their workers, particularly women. First and
foremost, employers need to be adamant in
ensuring that there are no abuses within the
company structure, paying special attention
to power differences between managers and
subordinates. There must be means of reporting
abuses outside of the management chain, with
the promise of anonymity so that the subordinate
does not fear retaliation for reporting.
Companies can also help ensure security
by providing dedicated transport and
accommodation, security surveillance, and basic
personal alarms for employees.
Respecting differences, language barriers,
and cultural differences can improve
efficiency. In a recent study by McKinsey, 
culture and trust was rated as the fourth top
concern of Chinese firms in Africa. For African
leaders, cultural barriers is rated the second top
concern when dealing with Chinese investors.
It is vital to overcome these challenges with
strong communications and a focus on how staff
from different backgrounds can most effectively
work together. Possible solutions include:
= Ensuring compliance with the legislation
specific to each country for working hours,
overtime, paid leave and public holidays;
 |nvesting in English or local language classes
for Chinese staff;
 |nvesting in Chinese language classes for
local management staff;
 |ncorporating a number of Chinese and local
cultural activities and celebrations into the
annual calendar of the company;
m Preparing Chinese staff for cultural
differences, including in work culture and skills
proficiency.
Investors should empower women with
equal access to opportunities and equal pay.
Women's economic empowerment boosts
productivity, increases economic diversification
and income equality, and has trickle down
benefits to the wider community. As women
bear a disproportionate amount of the burden for
childcare, the economic empowerment of women
has a significant impact on the education levels
of their children, thereby helping to enhance local
economic development prospects.
Provide appropriate risk management and
facilities for pregnant and lactating women.
Women who are pregnant, have given birth
within the past six months or are breastfeeding
are vulnerable to specific risk and may require
special considerations beyond the national
legislation discussed in Chapter 2. The employer
should take into account any risks identified in
their workplace and aim to take the necessary
measures to remove, reduce or control the risk.
Promote education and child care.
Employers can support initiatives to promote
education and child care for workers children.
For instance, employers can provide direct
support to establish nursing centres for mothers
with small children. Beyond this, employers
can collaborate with local child care services to
cover day care services for workers children.
This approach benefits workers with children and
contributes to create opportunities for women
in the formal labour market. Without access to
free or low-cost child care programmes, many
women with children face barriers to access
formal work opportunities.
Promote health care. Even in countries where
healthcare is universally provided by the state,
or available at very low costs for workers,
out-of-pocket payments to cover medications
and treatments represent a challenge for most
people. Their inability to cover such treatments
and access adequate medical healthcare directly
impacts workers productivity and wellbeing at
home and in the workplace. Possible solutions
that employers can adopt to overcome these
challenges are:
= Providing direct support to workers to cover
costs of medical treatment;
= Providing health insurance to workers and
their families;
 Collaborating with local health centres
and NGOs acting in the region to provide
medications and treatments at an accessible
price.
= Promote womens health. Particularly where
the majority of the workforce are young women
and the factory is situated far away from health
centres. Aim to collaborate with local community
health centres or with local NGOs to provide
basic services. Work with such partners to make
contraceptives and vaccines available at the
factory.
Disability inclusion can also generate
substantial benefits for employers and
communities. Persons with disabilities are
often marginalized but can add great value
to businesses and the economy when given
the right opportunity. Implement an equal
opportunities policy and consider a proactive
approach to employing people with disabilities
for appropriate roles. Consider how best to
enhance accessibility to, from and around the
workplace.
ok
0 Investing in local skills and
Be managers
Developing local talent and supporting employee
growth is crucial to build workforce capacities and
ensure mutually beneficial business growth. These
practices can ensure that the investing company
retains positive relations with the local community
and its workforce and helps develop the local
economy, which, in turn, will support the investing
company as well.
= Provide apprenticeship and training
initiatives for youth. Develop the skills of young
people for their inclusion in the job market. This
enables companies to diversify their workforce,
while contributing to transferring knowledge from
experienced workers to trainees.
= Provide clear career progression. Employers
can increasing proficiency in skills and
management expertise with higher salaries and
increased responsibility.
= | ocal management staff. It is important to
ensure that there is a prominent role for local
management staff members. This will help
to create a working environment with more
integration and understanding between Chinese
and local staff, and can serve as role models for
more junior local staff.
= Additional training to develop skills.
Employers should consider providing and
covering the costs of additional training to
staff and managers to help build skills and
competences. This could include driving lessons
to obtain a license, language lessons, and
management training.
= Additional qualifications. Employers can
consider helping promising management staff
the opportunity to achieve additional technical or
university qualifications, via financial support or
providing sufficient time off to study.
=] Building the skills and
8 8  capacity of local parmer
Vakm companies
Foreign investors can play a valuable role in
developing the skills and technologies of local
business through different measures such as:
= Where appropriate, investors should
consider how partnerships can help to
transfer skills and technology.
= |n the case of a joint venture or official
partnership, consider how a structured
approach may maximize skills and technology
transfer to the local partner.
= Ensure fair payment terms and speedy
payment for goods or services procured,
especially from local companies.
= |n cases where there may be disputes,
consider alternative dispute resolution
(ADL), including negotiation, conciliation,
mediation and arbitration.
ON Communications and
public relations
Positive and proactive engagement with the local
community in which the investor is operating
is crucial to establish and maintain strong
communication channels. Investing companies
are often perceived to be closed to community
dialogue, so it is important to counter this
perception with genuine outreach and a mechanism
to address concerns.
= Carry out independent due diligence and
consultation when preparing to invest in an
area. Sometimes governments will bypass local
concerns. Don't be tempted to take what seems
like the easiest approach. Investigate local
concerns.
= Follow the principle of free, prior and
informed consent (FPIC). % FPIC refers to
the right of local communities, particularly
indigenous peoples, to participate in decision
making about issues affecting them. Disclose the
economic, social and environmental impacts that
may or have already resulted from investment
decisions. Full disclosure to community of plans
and mitigating measures is advised.
= Enable and respond to feedback. Develop
and enable channels for local communities to
register grievances and establish systems to
address them appropriately, and ensure that the
project's implementation and future operations
consider stakeholder concerns.
= Manage expectations. Investors often face
complex and high expectations from local
communities and NGOs that believe a company
has endless resources with which to offer
development benefits. It is very important
to manage expectations while offering (or
explaining) tangible benefits that are feasible for
= Share the positive news, particularly with
local stakeholders. Publicize activities where
appropriate so that the impact is known by the
public and by customers. At the same time,
do not engage in greenwashing or claiming
sustainable actions without merit in order to give
the perception of a socially and environmentally-
conscious company.
= Seek interaction with different stakeholders.
If community relations are a challenge, refer the
issues to different stakeholders, including local
or national governments, and seek assistance,
rather than letting the problem grow. There is a
risk that companies see everyone as a problem
rather than seeking appropriate guidance.
= Stick to what the business license allows.
Investors should follow their stated intentions,
for which the environmental license was granted.
If an approach needs to change, ensure the
community is aware and understands the
rationale.
Corporate social
ro responsibility strategy
As discussed in Chapter 1, this handbook defines
CSR as additional activities that a company can
choose to implement beyond core business
operations.
= Develop a CSR initiative based on what is
most needed by a community. [dentify key
national and local development issues and how
they may match the companys strengths and the
interests of local communities.
= Develop partnerships to increase impact.
Communicate with other investors, companies
and development partners about infrastructure
that would strengthen the sector. What win-win
initiatives could be explored?
= Monitor and evaluate the impact of CSR
activities. On a regular basis, monitor the
implementation of CSR activities in order to
capture their outcomes and impact on beneficiary
communities. This enables businesses to
evaluate their relevance and effectiveness in
comparison to the initial activity design.
|
| I Advice from local
governments
Local governments across Africa often have
dedicated units that are able to provide background
context or suggestions to investors on more
sustainable production processes or business
approaches, within the context of their specific
region.
In Ethiopia, for instance, a dedicated sustainability
unit is likely to be set up within the Ethiopian
Investment Commission from 2020.
Factors to be consulted with local institutions include:
 | ocation selection to maximize sustainable
outcomes;
 Sustainable production techniques;
= Where to source raw materials;
m Vertically-integrated supply chains  linking to
value chains;
 Circular economy opportunities, including with
other businesses;
 Resilience to the impacts of climate change
evident now and likely in the future;
& | Engaging with the local
0p business community
Chinese-owned companies are encouraged to
look beyond Chinese business associations and
to engage more with local chambers of commerce
and business associations.
Chambers of commerce provide valuable fora to
share information, meet new contacts and identify
potential business linkages for example, suppliers
of raw materials. Interviews carried out with national
chambers of commerce during the preparation of
this handbook indicated that they are interested in
welcoming more Chinese-owned companies as
members to help support and enrich local and other
international businesses.
In Ethiopia, one of the key significant chambers of
commerce is the Ethiopian Chamber of Commerce
and Sectoral Association.
Website: http: //ethiopianchamber. com
Email: cthchamb@ethionet. ct
Phone: +251-115514005
Address: Ethiopian Chamber of Commerce &
Sectoral Associations Building, 1% Floor,
Mexico Square, Addis Ababa.
=#* | Closing strategy aligned
= with sustainability
In the event of investors closing their operations
in Ethiopia, it is important to fully identify the likely
impacts on staff and stakeholders and to address
them appropriately. Below are some of the key
considerations for closing or decommissioning
a business.
Follow the necessary enterprise deregistration
process and ensure that all important assets and
documentation are protected.
Communicate effectively with employees, trade
unions and stakeholders so that the reasons
for closure, the process and timeframe are fully
understood. This will help avoid employee and
community dissatisfaction and potential unrest.
Treat employees according to their rights and
best interests, and properly handle employee
compensation.
As set out in Chapter 2, where the exit involves
plant closure and land use exit, commission
an accredited specialist to prepare a
decommissioning plan to be approved by the
relevant environmental authority. Implement the
necessary environmental remediation to the
site as it is being closed down. Comply with the
relevant environmental legislation relating to
pollution, biodiversity and land rehabilitation.
Consult with community groups that may be
impacted by potential closure and provide
appropriate compensation if necessary.
In the case of bankruptcy, ensure that the
national regulations and requirements are
understood and complied with, relating to project
dissolution and bankruptcy filing.
In the case of selling the business to other
investors, ensure that labour and environmental
practices are communicated to the new business
owner.
Consider carrying out a post-investment
evaluation, whereby the causes for project
success or failure are assessed and lessons
learned can be captured and fed into subsequent
projects, helping to improve sustainability and
the chances of success.
BOX 3: Chinese sustainability guidelines developed for Chinese companies
working abroad
= Guidance for Chinese Textile and Apparel
Industry on Responsible Overseas
Investment (2018). Developed by the China
National Textile and Apparel Council with
support from the German Corporation for
International Cooperation. This is also a
voluntary standard. (CSC9000T: 2018) 
English version: hitp: /www. asiatex. org/
Uploads/File/2019/06/06/u5ci88657e4cc. pdf
Chinese version: hitp: /Awww. asiatex. org/
Uploads/File/2019/06/06/u5c{8867280dfe. pdf
= Guidelines for Environmental Protection
in Foreign Investment and Cooperation,
2013. Developed by Ministry of Commerce of
the Peoples Republic of China (MOFCOM)
and former Ministry for Environmental
Protection 
English version: hitp: //english. mofcom. gov. en/
article/policyrelease/bbb/201303/20130300043226. shtml
Chinese version: hitp: /Awvww. mofcom. gov. cn/
article/b/bf/201302/201 30200039930. shim!
= Community Engagement Handbook for
Chinese International Contractors, 2018.
Developed by SynTao, China International
Contractors Association, The Asia Foundation
Beijing Representative Office, Tsinghua University
School of Economics and Management,
and the Simeng CSR Promotion Centre 
English version: hitp: /en. syntao. com/syntacEN/
public/uploads/20190114/05d0f00d ae 7e2a6e001c242
b2b962a41. pdf
Chinese version: hitp: //syntac. com/syntac/
public/uploads/20181029/2e6a7e3035e2273d68e9275
7ab893foc. pdf
= Guide on Sustainable Overseas Forests
Management and Utilization by Chinese
Enterprises (2009). Developed by
MOFCOM and the (Chinese) State Forestry
Administration (SFA) 
English version: hitp: /Awww. chinafile. com/
library/reports/Guide-sustainable-overseas-silviculture-
chinese-enterprises
There are a number of sector-specific guidelines
that have been developed for Chinese companies
working abroad. Some of the most relevant are listed
in Box 3.
Investors may consider complying with relevant
voluntary sustainability standards, which normally
require annual audits and accreditation by an
independent body. This can add great value to
the brand and reputation of a company, as well as
enhance market access opportunities.
There are hundreds of voluntary standards tailored to
specific processes, so it is advised that investors check
which ones apply to their business. The online platform
Sustainability Map (www. sustainabilitymap. org)
developed by ITC provides information on over 250
voluntary sustainability standards that are active in
a wide range of countries and sectors. Companies
can use this free online platform to improve their
ability to identify, assess and compare voluntary
standards relevant to their needs.
Sustainability resources and networks
in sub-Saharan Africa
The following sustainability resources offer valuable
context, information and assistance.
Green Africa Directory
www. greenalfricadirectory. org
Africa Renewal
https: //mwww. un. org/africarenewal/
WeSustain Africa
https: //wesustain. africa/
Figure 5 Free e-learning courses by sustainability area
Human Rights & Business
Learning Tool (English)
Developed by UN Global Compact
http: //human-rights-and-business-
learning-tool. unglobalcompact. org
Human Rights and Business
Dilemmas Forum (English)
https: //hrbdf. org
Courses on the thematic of
Decent Work (English)
Developed by the International
Training Centre of the International
Labour Organization (ILO)
https: //ecampus. itcilo. org
Courses on the thematic of Child
Labour (various languages)
https: //www. ilo. org/ipec/Information
resources/elearning/lang--en/
index. htm
ECONOMIC
E-learning courses developed
by ITC:
Approaching banks for financing
(English)
https: //learning. intracen. org/
course/info. php? id=148
Introduction to business plans
course/info. php? id=304
Considering Export Markets
course/info. php? id=189
Introduction to International
Transport and Logistics
course/info. php? id=277
More courses available at:
ENVIRONMENTAL C
Resource efficient and Circular
Production Processes
(English, French, Spanish)
Developed by ITC
To be launched in March 2020
Enterprises and Climate Change
(English, French)
To be launched in December 2019
Survival and Environment
(Chinese)
Developed by Shandong University
of Science and Technology
http: //open.163. com/special/cuvocw
/shengcunyuhuanjing. html
Environmental protection and
sustainable development
Developed by Tsinghua University
http: //open.163. com/special/
cuvoew/huanjingbaohu. html
Ecology and sustainable
development (Chinese)
Developed by Huazhong
Agricultural University
cuvocw/kechixufazhan. html
= UNDP Massive Open Online Course
(MOOC) on the Agenda 2030 for SDGs
(19 modules covering the 17 SDGs)
Developed by United Nations Development
Programme (UNPD)
https: //open.163. com/undpsdgmocc
ITC e-learning courses:
The Role of Standards in Sustainable
Supply Chains (English)
https: //learning. intracen. crg/course/info. php? id=205
Competitiveness Through Enterprise
Sustainability (English)
https: //learning. intracen. crg/course/info. php? id=237
Introduction to Standards and
https: //learning. intracen. crg/course/info. php? id=206
Introduction to Corporate Social
Responsibility (English)
https: //learning. intracen. crg/course/info. php? id=244
The SDGs are the set of goals, targets and
indicators adopted by the UN member states in
2015 providing a framework for the international
development agenda and political policies.
Businesses are also expected to take action
towards the implementation of the SDGs by:
indicators set by the SDGs
realisation of the SDGs.
1 Bem Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms
[rey everywhere
promote sustainable agriculture
f+" Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote
A fo well-being for all at all ages
learning opportunities for all
empower all women and girls
Goal 6: Ensure availability and
sanitation for all
for alll
More information about the SDGs:
aligning their strategies to the goals, targets and
managing and measuring their contribution to the
Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food
security and improved nutrition and
Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable
quality education and promote lifelong
Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and
sustainable management of water and
Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable,
reliable, sustainable and modern energy
Goal 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and
sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work
Goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure,
promote inclusive and sustainable
industrialization and foster innovation
Goal 10: Reduce inequality within and
among countries
Goal 11: Make cities and human
settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and
sustainable
Goal 12: Ensure sustainable
consumption and production patterns
Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat
climate change and its impacts
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use
the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development
Goal 15: Protect, restore and promote
sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems,
sustainably manage forests, combat
desertification, and halt and reverse land
degradation and halt biodiversity loss
Goal 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive
societies for sustainable development,
provide access to justice for all and build
effective, accountable and inclusive
institutions at all levels
Goal 17: Strengthen the means of
implementation and revitalize the global
partnership for sustainable development
= Official webpage of the UN SDGs: https: //sustainabledevelopment. un. org/? menu= 1300
m SDG Compass: The guide for business action on the SDGs (English version):
https: //sdgcompass. org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/019104 SDG Compass Guide 2015. pdf
= SDG Compass: SDGs ( BEE OJH45 E Bix ) BW T5h3ERS (Chinese version):
https: //sdgcompass. org/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/SDG_Compass Guide Chinese. pdf
The Ten Principles of the UN Global Compact
HUMAN RIGHTS
Principle 1: Businesses should support and respect the protection of
internationally proclaimed human rights; and
Principle 2: make sure that they are not complicit in human rights abuses.
LABOUR
Principle 3: Businesses should uphold the freedom of association and the
effective recognition of the right to collective bargaining;
Principle 4: the elimination of all forms of forced and compulsory labour;
Principle 5: the effective abolition of child labour; and
Principle 6: the elimination of discrimination in respect of employment and
occupation.
ENVIRONMENT
Principle 7: Businesses should support a precautionary approach to
environmental challenges;
Principle 8: undertake initiatives to promote greater environmental
responsibility; and
Principle 9: encourage the development and diffusion of environmentally
friendly technologies.
Principle 10: Businesses should work against corruption in all its forms,
including extortion and bribery.
Available at:
https: //www. unglobalcompact. org/what-is-gc/mission/principles
Food and Agriculture Business Principles
of the Global Compact
1. Aim for Food Security, Health and Nutrition
Businesses should support food and agriculture systems that optimize
production and minimize waste, to provide nutrition and promote health
for all people
2. Be Environmentally Responsible
Businesses should support sustainable intensification of food systems to
meet global needs by managing agriculture, livestock, fisheries and forestry
responsibly. They should protect and enhance the environment
3. Ensure Economic Viability and Share Value
Businesses should create, deliver and share value across the entire food and
agriculture chain from farmers to consumers.
4. Respect Human Rights, Create Decent Work and Help Communities
To Thrive
Businesses should respect the rights of farmers, workers and consumers.
They should improve livelihoods, promote and provide equal opportunities.
5. Encourage Good Governance and Accountability
Businesses should behave legally and responsibly by respecting land and
natural resource rights, avoiding corruption, being transparent about activities
and recognising their impacts.
6. Promote Access and Transfer of Knowledge, Skills and Technology
Businesses should promote access to information, knowledge and skills for
more sustainable food and agricultural systems.
https: /fwww. unglobalcompact org/take-action/action/food
ENDNOTES
14
15
20
21
UN Global Compact; Transparency International. & International Business Leaders (2011).
Business Against Corruption. A framework for action.
United Nations (1987). Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development.
Our Common Future.
See Appendix 1 for more information on the SDGs.
UNDP (2017) 2017 Report on the Sustainable Development of Chinese Enterprises Overseas: Supporting
the Belt and Road Regions to Achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Sun, I, R. , Jayaram, K. , and Kassiri, O. (2017) Dance of the Lions and Dragons: How are Africa and China
engaging and how will the partnership evolve? McKinsey and Company.
Guogiang, L. et al (2009) Advancing Sustainable Competitiveness of Chinas Transnational corporations.
Jointly produced by Development Research Centre of the State Council of the Peoples Republic of China
and Accountability.
Ministry of Commerce of the Peoples Republic of China and Ministry of Environmental Protection of the
Peoples Republic of China (2013). Guidelines for Environmental Protection in Foreign Investment and
Cooperation. Available from (English version):
http: //english. mofcom. gov. en/article/palicyrelease/bbb/201303/20130300043226. shtml
Available from (Chinese version) http: /Avww. mofcom. gov. cn/article/b/bf/201302/20130200039930. shtml
The Belt and Road Initiative is an infrastructure development and investment initiative to connect Asia with
Africa. It was launched in 2013 by the Chinese Government with the aim to improve regional integration,
increase trade and promote economic growth.
Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) criteria refers to the set of sustainability factors used to
measure the impact of potential investments.
Yeung, K. (2017, September 27). Chinas sustainable firms are starting to outperform. South China
Morning Post.
Davies, R, Reineking, B. R. , & Westgate, R. A. (2018, February 6). China Mandates ESG Disclosures for
Listed Companies and Bond Issuers.
UNCTAD et. al (2011). Report on promoting standards for responsible investment in value chains. Report
to the High-Level Development Working Group.
Guogiang, L. et al. (2009) Advancing Sustainable Competitiveness of Chinas Transnational corporations.
International Organisation of Employers (n. d. ). The Living Wage.
IFC (2012). Performance Standard 5, Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement. Available from
(English version): https: /Aww. ifc. org/wps/wem/connect/75de96d4-ed36-4bdb-8050-400be02bf2d9/
PS5_English_2012. pdf? MOD=AJPERES&CVID=jqex59b
Available from (Chinese version) https: //www. ifc. org awps/wem/connect/5da71772-f470-488f-bdd5-
85d3ae0c3eec/PS5_Chinese_2012. pdf? MOD=AJPERES&CVID=|naibT4
International Trade Centre (2019). The European Union Market for Sustainable Products. The retail
perspective on sourcing policies and consumer demand. ITC, Geneva.
Transparency International (2019). Global Corruption Barometer Africa 2019. Citizen's views and
experiences of corruption.
Sun, I. Y. and Tang, X. (2016) Social Responsibility or Development Responsibility - What Is the
Environmental Impact of Chinese Investments in Africa: What Are Its Drivers, and What Are the Possibilities
for Action, Cornell International Law Journal: Vol. 49, Iss. 1
It provides direct guidance to enterprises (multinational and national) on social policy and inclusive,
responsible and sustainable workplace practices. ILO (2017). Tripartite Declaration of Principles
concerning Multinational Enterprises and Sccial Policy (MNE Declaration).
It provides non-binding principles and standards for responsible business conduct. OECD (2011), OECD
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, OECD Publishing.
It is a principle-based framework for businesses, established by the United Nations, covering 10 principles
of sustainable business conduct. See Appendix 2 for mare details.
22
23
24
25
26
28
31
36
40
42
43
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
It provides guidelines for States and companies to prevent, address and remedy human rights abuses
committed in business operations. OHCHR (2011). Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights:
implementing the United Nations Protect, Respect and Remedy Framework.
Wenban-Smith, M. (2013) Voluntary sustainability standards. Today's landscape of issues & initiatives to
achieve public policy objectives. Part 1: Issues. UNFSS.
For example, Nike has around 31% of the global market for athletic footwear. Through its supplier code
of conduct, in 2008 Nike influenced the conditions of more than 800,000 employees in 700 factories in
45 countries. UNCTAD et al. (2011) Promoting Standards for Responsible Investment in Value Chains.
Report to the High-Level Development Working Group.
and AccountAbility.
Ibid: Guogiang, L. et al (2009)
UNCTAD et al. (2011). Promoting Standards for Responsible Investment in Value Chains.
Kenya China Economic Trade Association (2017). Chinese Enterprises in Kenya Social Responsibility
Report.
The examples provided do not capture all potential issues and risks associated with each of the
sustainability sub-areas of concern.
ILO (n. d. ). ILO Conventions and Recommendations on child labour.
ILO (1958). Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111).
Note that EIAs are sometimes referred to as Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA).
The requirements and contents of the assessment remain the same.
Ethiopian Investment Authority, 2017
Environmental Policy of Ethiopia (1997). Available from
https: /ftheredddesk. org/sites/default files/environment_policy_of ethiopia_1. pdf
Federal Negarit Gazeta, Year 9, No. 11 (2002, 3 December). Environmental Impact Assessment
Proclamation No. 2899/2002. Available from http: //extwprlegst. fac. org/docs/pdf/eth44281. pdf
Federal Negarit Gazeta, Year 9, No.12 (2002, 3 December). Environmental Pollution Control Proclamation
No. 300/2002. Available from http: //extwprlegst. fac. org/docs/pdf/eth44282 pdf
Federal Negarit Gazeta, Year 15, No. 14 (2008). Regulation to Provide for the Prevention of Industrial
Pollution No. 159/2008. Available from http: //extwprlegst. fac. org/docs/pdf/eth165348. pdf
Federal Negarit Gazeta, Year 13, No. 13 (2007, 12 February). Solid Waste Management Proclamation No.
5183/2007. Available from http: //extwprlegs. fac. org/docs/pdf/eth95457 pdf
Federal Negarit Gazette, Year 2019, No. 89 (2019, 5 September). Civil Code Proclamation No. 1156/2019.
Available from https: //drive. gocgle. com/file/d/1mBnICBhqSVbw1f_Ow2knAWyGz3V_Py38/view.
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Ethiopia. Available from
https: /vww. wipo. int/edocs/lexdocsAaws/en/et/et007en. pdf
Text not available online.
Negarit Gazeta Extraordinary Issue, Year 19, No. 2 (1960, 5 May). Civil Code Proclamation No. 165/1960.
Available from http: //ilo. ch/dyn/natlex/natlex4. detail? p_lang=en&p_isn=52399&p_count=994708p_
classification=01&p_classcount=13011
Federal Negarit Gazeta, Year 16, No. 50 (2010, 19 August). Social Health Insurance Proclamation No.
8690/2010. Available from
https: /ww. ilo. org/dyn/travail /docs/269/Social%20Health%20Insurance%20Proclamation%202010. pdf
Federal Negarit Gazeta, No. 44 (2005, 15 July). Private Organization Employees Pension Proclamation
No. 715/2011. Available from
https: /Avww. ilo. org/dyn/natlex/natlex4. detail ? p_lang=en&p_isn=89585&p_country=ETH&p_count=141
Federal Negarit Gazeta, Year 18, No. 4 (2011, 28 November). Urban Lands Lease Holding Proclamation
No. 721/2011. Available from http: //extwprlegs?. fac. org/docs/pdf/eth 169468. pdf
Federal Negarit Gazeta, Year 11, No. 44 (2005, 15 July). Rural Land Administration and Land Use
Proclamation No. 456/2005. Available from http: //extwprlegst. fac. org/docs/pdf/eth95459. pdf
Policies that require companies to source intermediate goods or services from the domestic market.
Ethiopian Investment Commission website. Available from http: /Aww. investethiopia. gov. et/
iGuide Ethiopia. An Investment Guide to Ethiopia. Available from
https: /mww. theiguides. org/public-docs/guides/ethicpia
EIC (2017). An Investment Guide to Ethiopia. Available from: http : /Avww. intracen. org/uploadedFiles/
intracenorg/Content/Redesign/Projects/PIGA/EIC%20Investor%20Guide-August%2015_17. pdf
Ethiopian Calendar
Growth and Transformation Plan Il (GTP Il) (2015/16-2019/20). Vol. 1: Main text. Available from
https: /vww. greengrowthknowledge. crg/sites/default/files/downloads/policy-database/E THIOPIA%29%20
Growth %20and%20Transformation%20Plan%2011%2C%20Vol%201.9%620%20%28201 5%2C16-
2019%2C20%29 pdf
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
FDRE Ministry of Industry (2013). Ethiopian Industrial Development Strategic Plan (2013-2025). Available
from https: //www. academia. edu/28903445/Ethiopian_Industrial_Development_Strategic_Plan_2013-
2025 _FDRE_Ministry_of Industry
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (n. d. ). Ethiopias Climate Resilient Green Economy. Green
economy strategy. Available from https: /Aww. undp. org/content/dam/ethiopia/docs/Ethiopia%20CRGE. pdf
Enterprise Partners (2017). Leather Sector Strategy. Available from http: //enterprisepartners. org/
download/the-more-trends-change-the-more-they-stay-the-samesxsw-2017/? wpdmdl=445
Ministry of Health and Ministry of Industry (2015). National strategy and plan of action for pharmaceutical
manufacturing development in Ethiopia (2015-2025). Available from https: //www. who. int/phi/publications/
Ethiopia_strategy local_poduction. pdf
Enterprise Partners (2017). Garments Sector Strategy. Available from http: //enterprisepartners. org/
download/the-standard-lorem-ipsum-passage-used-since-the-1500s/? wpdmdl=447
Enterprise Partners (2017). Horticulture Sector Strategy. Available from http: //enterprisepartners. org/
download/section-1-10-32-of-de-finibus-bonorum-et-malcrum-written-by-cicero-in-45-be/? wpdmdl= 453
Sun, |, R. , Jayaram, K. , and Kassiri, O. (2017) Dance of the Lions and Dragons: How are Africa and
China engaging and how will the partnership evolve? McKinsey and Company.
International Trade Centre (2018). Partnership for Investment and Growth in Africa (PIGA) Research
Report: Sustainable Investment Survey  Ethiopia, Kenya, Mozambique, Zambia 2018. ITC, Geneva.
International Monetary Fund (2018). Pursuing Womens Economic Empowerment https: /Avww. imf. org/en/
Publications/Policy-Papers/Issues/2018/05/31 /pp0531 18pursuing-womens-economic-empowerment
This principle follows the definition of FPIC from the United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous
Issues.
http: //www. asiatex. org/Uploads/File/2019/06/06/u5cf88657e4cc9. pdf
http: //www. asiatex. org/Uploads/File/2019/06/06/u5cf8867280dfe. pdf
http: //english. mofcom. gov. cn/article/pclicyrelease/bbb/201303/20130300043226. shtml
http: //www. mofcom. gov. cn/article/b/bf/201302/20130200039930. shtml
http: //en. syntao. com/syntacEN/public/uploads/20190114/05d0f00dae7e2a6e001c249020962a4 1 pdf
http: //syntao. com/syntac/public/uploads/20181029/2e6a7e3035e2273d68292757ab893fbc. pdf
http: //www. chinafile. com/library/reports/guide-sustainable-overseas-silviculture-chinese-enterprises
www. sustainabilitymap. org
GRI, UN Global Compact & WBSCD. (2015). SDG Compass. The guide for business action on SDGs.
GRI, UN Global Compact & WBSCD. (2015). SDG Compass. (FEE HELR BR ) BU iTEhiETME
REFERENCES
China National Textile and Apparel Council (CNTAC) (2018). Guidance for Chinese Textile and Apparel Industry
on Responsible Overseas Investment. Available from http: /Avww. asiatex. org/en/publications/365. html
Davies, P, Reineking, B. R. , & Westgate, R. A. (2018, February 6). China Mandates ESG Disclosures for
Listed Companies and Bond Issuers. Lexology. Available from https: //www. lexology. com/library/detail.
aspx? g=~61af067d-4fd6-4ad9-91d6-bb01037fb 166
Guogiang, L. et al. (2009). Advancing Sustainable Competitiveness of Chinas Transnational corporations.
Jointly produced by Development Research Centre of the State Council of the Peoples Republic of
China and AccountAbility. Available from https: //www. iisd. crg/pdf/2010/advancing_sustainability corp. pdf
https: /Aww. ifc. org/wps/woem/connect/75de96d4-ed36-4bdb-8050-400be02bf2d9/PS5_English_2012.
pdf? MOD=AJPERES&CVID=|qex59b
ILO (n. d. ). ILO Conventions and Recommendations on child labour. Available from https: /Awvww. ilo. org/ipec/
facts/ILOconventionsonchildlabour/lang--en/index. htm
ILO (1958). Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 (No. 111). Available from
https: /vww. ohchr. org/EN/Professionallnterest/Pages/EmploymentAndOccupation. aspx
ILO (2017). Tripartite Declaration of Principles concerning Multinational Enterprises and Social Policy
(MNE Declaration). https: /Avww. imf. org/en/Publications/Policy-Papers/Issues/2018/05/31/
pPP053118pursuing-womens-economic-empo
International Monetary Fund (2018). Pursuing Womens Economic Empowerment. Available from
https: /mww. imf. org/en/Publications/Policy-Papers/Issues/2018/05/31/pp0531 18pursuing-womens-
economic-empowerment
International Organisation of Employers (n. d. ). The Living Wage. Available from https: /www. ioe-emp. org/
index. php? elD=dumpFile&t=1&f=111029&tcken=1731a3cbc03db464d53d4541a1b55e110edee2cf
International Trade Centre. (2018). Partnership for Investment and Growth in Africa (PIGA) Research Report:
Sustainable Investment Survey  Ethiopia, Kenya, Mozambique, Zambia 2018. Geneva: ITC.
perspective on sourcing policies and consumer demand. ITC, Geneva. Available from
http //www. intracen. org/uploadedFiles/intracenorg/Content/Publications/EU%20Market %20for%20
Sustainable%20Products_Report_E_ WEB pdf
Kenya China Economic Trade Association (2017). Chinese Enterprises in Kenya Social Responsibility Report.
Available from http: //ke2 mofcom. gov. cn/17en. pdf
Ministry of Commerce of the Peoples Republic of China and Ministry of Environmental Protection
of the Peoples Republic of China (2013). Guidelines for Environmental Protection in Foreign
Investment and Cooperation. Available from http: //english. mofcom. gov. cn/article/policyrelease/
bbb/201303/20130300043226. shtml
OECD. (2011). OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises. OECD Publishing.
Available from https: //doi. org/10.1787/9789264115415-en
OHCHR (2011). Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights: implementing the United Nations
Protect, Respect and Remedy Framework. Available from https: //www. chchr. org/documents/
publications/GuidingprinciplesBusinesshr_eN. pdf
China engaging and how will the partnership evolve? McKinsey & Company. Available from
https: /mww. mckinsey. com/~/media/McKinsey/Featured%20Insights/Middle%20East%20and%20Africa/
The%20closest%20loock%20yet%20at%20Chinese%20economic%20engagement%20in%20Africa/
Dance-of-the-lions-and-dragons. ashx
Sun, I. Y, , & Tang, X. (2016). Social Responsibility or Development Responsibility - What Is the Environmental
Impact of Chinese Investments in Africa: What Are Its Drivers, and What Are the Possibilities for Action.
Cornell International Law Journal, 49(1).
Syntao et al. (2018). Community Engagement Handbook for Chinese International Contractors. Available
from (English version) http: //en. syntac. com/syntacEN/public/uploads/20190114/05d0f00dae7e2a6e001c
249b2b962a41 pdf Available from (Chinese version) http: //syntac. com/syntao/public/uploads/20181029/
2e6a7e303562273d68e92757ab893fbe. pdf
Transparency International (2019). Global Corruption Barometer Africa 2019. Citizen's views and experiences
of corruption. Available from https: //www. transparency. org/ffiles/content/pages/2019_GCB_Africa. pdf
United Nations (1987). Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development. Our Common
Future. Available from https: //sustainabledevelopment. un. org/content/documents/5987cur-common-
future. pdf
United Nations Global Compact; Transparency International. & International Business Leaders (2011).
Business Against Corruption. A framework for action. Available from https: //Aww. unglobalcompact. org/
docs/news_events/8.1/bac_fin. pdf
UNCTAD et al. (2011). Report on promoting standards for responsible investment in value chains. Report to
the High-Level Development Working Group. Available from https: //unctad. org/sections/dite_dir/docs/
diae_G20_CSR_Standards Report_en. pdf
UNDP (2017). 2017 Report on the Sustainable Development of Chinese Enterprises Overseas: Supporting
the Belt and Road Regions to Achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Available from
https: //www. cn. undp. org/content/china/en/homeflibrary/south-south-cooperation/2017-report-on-the-
sustainable-development-of-chinese-enterprise. html
Wenban-Smith, M. (2013). Voluntary sustainability standards. Today's landscape of issues & initiatives to
achieve public palicy objectives. Part 1: Issues. UNFSS. Available from https: //unfss files. wordpress.
com/2012/05/unfss-report-initiatives-2_draft_lores. pdf
Weng, X. and Buckley, L. (2016). Chinese Business in Africa: Perspectives on corporate social responsibility
and the role of Chinese government pclicies. IED Discussion Paper. Available from
https: //pubs. iied. org/pdfs/175811IED. pdf
Yeung, K. (2017, September 27). Chinas sustainable firms are starting to outperform. South China Morning
Post. Available from https: /Awww. scmp. com/business/money/stock-talk/article/2112942/chinas-
sustainable-firms-are-starting-cutperform
CHAPTER 2
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Ethiopia. Available from https: /www. wipo. int/edocs/lexdocs/laws/en/
et/et007en. pdf
Environmental Policy of Ethiopia (1997). Available from https: //theredddesk. crg/sites/defaultfiles/
environment _policy_of ethiopia_1. pdf
Enterprise Partners (2017). Garments Sector Strategy. Available from http: //enterprisepartners. org/download/
the-standard-lorem-ipsum-passage-used-since-the-1500s/? wpdmdl=447
Enterprise Partners (2017). Leather Sector Strategy. Available from http: //enterprisepartners. org/download/
the-more-trends-change-the-more-they-stay-the-samesxsw-2017/? wpdmd| = 445
Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) website. Available from http: //www. investethiopia. gov. et/
intracenorg/Content/Redesign/Projects/PIGA/EIC%20Investor%20Guide-August? %2015_17. pdf
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (n. d. ). Ethiopias Climate Resilient Green Economy. Green economy
strategy. Available from https: //www. undp. org/content/dam/ethiopia/docs/Ethiopia%20CRGE pdf
Federal Negarit Gazeta, Year 9, No. 11 (2002, 3 December). Environmental Impact Assessment Proclamation
No. 299/2002. Available from http: //extwprlegs1. fac. org/docs/pdf/eth44281 pdf
No. 300/2002. Available from http: //extwprlegs1. fac. org/docs/pdf/eth44282 pdf
No. 715/2011. Available from https: /Aww. ilo. org/dyn/natlex/natlex4. detail ? p_lang=en&p_isn=89585&p
country=ETH&p_count=141
Federal Negarit Gazeta, Year 13, No. 13 (2007, 12 February). Sclid Waste Management Proclamation
No. 5183/2007. Available from http: //extwprlegsi . fac. org/docs/pdf/eth95457 pdf
Federal Negarit Gazeta, Year 15, No. 14 (2008). Regulation to Provide for the Prevention of Industrial Pollution
No. 159/2008. Available from http: //extwprlegs?. fac. org/docs/pdf/eth165348. pdf
Federal Negarit Gazeta, Year 16, No. 50 (2010, 19 August). Social Health Insurance Proclamation
No. 690/2010. Available from https: /Awww. ilo. org/dyn/travail /docs/269/Social%20Health%20Insurance%20
Proclamation%202010. pdf
No. 721/2011. Available from http: //extwprlegs?. fac. org/docs/pdf/eth169468. pdf
https: //www. greengrowthknowledge. org/sites/default files/downloads/policy-database/E THIOPIA%29%20
Growth %20and%20 Transformation %20Plan%2011%2C%20Vol %201. %20%20%282015%2C16-
2019%2C20%29. pdf
iGuide Ethiopia. An Investment Guide to Ethiopia. Available from https: /www. theiguides. org/public-docs/
guides/ethiopia
Ministry of Industry (2013). Ethiopian Industrial Development Strategic Plan (2013-2025). Available from
https: /Aww. academia. edu/28903445/Ethiopian_Industrial_Development_Strategic_Plan_2013-2025
FDRE_Ministry_of Industry Ministry of Health and Ministry of Industry (2015). National strategy and plan
of action for pharmaceutical manufacturing development in Ethiopia (2015-2025). Available from
https: /Avww. who. int/phi/publications/Ethiopia_strategy_local_poduction. pdf
Printed by ITC Digital Printing Service.
Afree pdf is available on ITC's website at:
www. intracen. org/publications. org
De International
PY Cone
Street address: ITC,
54-56, rue de Montbrillant,
Postal address: ITC,
Palais des Nations,
Telephone: +41-22 730 0111
Fax: +4122 733 4439
E-mail: itcreg@intracen. org
Internet: www. intracen. org
Financed by and
in partnership with:
NI LA
ZL
uKaid
from the British people