   

  
FEDERAL NEGARIT GAZETTE
OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
        
     3      
21 Year No. 39
ADDIS ABABA, " April, 2015
  / .
   ......... ENE
CONTENTS
Proclamation No. 886/2015
Industrial Park Proclamation ........................ page 8205
tm -  3: . 275. A -    
  2/ .
 "  
 -   
    
     
: !
   : 
   ///  
27% 2165 |
PROCLAMATION NO. 886/2015
 UE 
APROCLAMATION ON INDUSTRIAL PARKS
WHEREAS, it 15 neccessary to accelerate [
economic transformation and development of the country
through the establishment of Industrial Parks in strategic
locations to promote and attract productive domestic and
foreign direct investment thereby upgrading industries and
generate employment opportunity;
RECOGNIZING, the need 10 enhance export
promotion, protection of environment and human
wellbeing, economical land use and establishing and
expanding planned urban centers:
RECOGNIZING. the paramount importance 
legislation in respect of establishment. development,
operation, management. and regulation of Industrial Parks;
NOW. THEREFORE, in accordance with Article 55
(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
UAT  ' . 1
Negarit G. P.0O. Box 80001
TREE     df     . Federal Negarit Gazette No 39 9% April, 2015
.......8 8206
a.
 
/"   
. 
   : -
8/    
    -
-   
/     
oC   
1.
2.
PART ONE
GENERAL
Short Title
This Proclamation may be cited as the Industrial Parks
Proclamation No.886/2015".
Definiti
In this Proclamation, unless the context otherwise
requires:
1/ Industrial Park means an area with distinct
boundary designated by the appropriate organ to
develop comprehensive, integrated, multiple or
selected functions of industries, based on a planned
fulfillment of infrastructure and various services
such as road, electric power and water, one stop
shop and have special incentive schemes, with a
broad view to achieving planned and systematic,
development of industries, mitigation of impacts of
pollution on environment and human being and
development of urban centers, and includes special
economic zones, technology parks, export
processing zones, agro-processing zone, free trade
zones and the like designated by the Investment
Board;
2/ asset means any movable or immovable
property as well as intangible property rights and
interests relating to Industrial Park owned by
public, public -private or private entities;
3/ land means any land designated for Industrial
Park;
|     AR     . - Federal Negarit Gazette No 39.9" April, 2015 ......... ....... page 8207
o/
/
 "    
"     
 "  : -
)     
)    
   Ap,
 "   
  -  
4/ developed land means land furnished with
infrastructures such as road, water, power,
telephone, dray and liquid sewerage discharging
facilities, air pollution mitigation facilities and
other important infrastructures;
5/ lease means a system of land tenure by which
the right of use of industrial park land is acquired
under a contract of a definite period;
6/ commencement of development means:
a) in the case of industrial park developer, the
construction of the foundation works of
telephone, dray and liquid sewerage treatment
facilities and other important infrastructures as
well as foundation works of buildings;
b) in the case of industrial park enterprise, the
construction of at least the foundation or
erection of re-enforcement bars to cast columns
of [ permitted construction or building on
the industrial park land;
7/ sub-lease means a transfer of parcel of
developed industrial park land to industrial park
enterprise by the industrial park developer or
industrial park operator which has been possessed
through allocation or lease;
2
    8  8   . Federal Negarit Gazenie No. 39 9" April, 2015 .................. page
8208
""   
  / 
  " 
 ACH  
8/ investraent means expenditure of capital in cash
or in kind or in both by an industrial park
developer, industrial park operator or industrial
park enterprise, as the case may be, to establish a
new or to expand or upgrade industrial park,
industrial park operation and industrial park
enterprises within the industry park in accordance
with the permit issued or agreements concluded;
9/ corporation Industrial 
Development Corporation established under
Council of Ministers Regulation 326/2014;
means 1
10/industrial park developer means any profit
making public, public-private or private developer
including the Corporation engaged in designing,
constructing or developing industrial parks in
accordance with Investment Proclamation and
Investment Regulations, industrial park developer
permit and industrial park developer agreement;
11/industrial park operator means any profit
making enterprise that operates, maintains or
promotes industrial park in accordance with the
Investment
Proclamation and Investment
Regulation, the industrial park operator permit
and industrial park operator agreement and,
includes the Corporation;
    88    5 .
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39 9" April, 2015 .................. page 8209
   - 
  . 
 !
 "  *
"    
/ () 
  - 
/ () !
8/   : -
12/industrial park enterprise means a public,
private or public-private enterprise owned by
Ethiopians, foreigners or jointly and possess
developed land under the industrial park through
sub-lease or by renting or building a factory
within the industrial park to engage in
manufacturing activity or in service provision for
profit making in accordance with Investment
Proclamation and Investment Regulation,
industrial park enterprise permit and industrial
park enterprise agreement;
13/Investment Proclamation and Investment
Regulation means the Investment Proclamation
9.769/2012- (as amended) and Investment
Incentives and Investment Areas Reserved for
Domestic Investors Council of Ministers
Regulations No. 270/2012 (as amended);
14/agreement means, as the case may be, an
agreement concluded between:
a) the Commission and industrial park
developer to design, construct, develop or
to provide other services within the
industry park;
b) the industrial park developer and
industrial park operator to operate,
maintain, promote or provide other
specialized support services within the
industrial park;
     @i     . - Federal Negarit Gazette 80. 39 ,9TM April, 2015 .............
..... page 8210
)   
/  -  -  
5/. *   
  Yar)
/    
 FEB)   
/- "  ""   
/   
8/ "  - " 
6)
15/
16/
17/
18/
19/
the industrial park developer or industrial park
operator and industrial park enterprise;
industrial park resident means a natural
person granted a certificate of industrial park
residence by the Commission in order to reside
within the residential area of the industrial park;
Government means the Government of the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia or
Regional government;
region means any state referred to under
Article 47 (1) of the Constitution of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and includes
Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa City
administrations;
Board and Commission means the Board
or the Commission established under the
Ethiopian Investment Board or the Ethiopian
Investment Commission Establishment Council
of Ministers Regulation No. 313/2014,
respectively;
competent authority means any federal,
regional or city administration government
organ having regulatory powers and duties over
particular subject matters or geographic areas in
respect of Industrial Parks;
#
it Gazette . 39 9" Apnl, 2015.................. 1
    girlfriend     . | Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39 ,9- April, 2015............ pag
8211
[/
LY)
" -   
   -
 -   - 
"  "   
'"'    
20/ investment permit means a permit issued by
21/
22/
23/
24/
25/
the Commission for Industrial Park Developer,
Industrial Park Operator or Industrial Park
Enterprise to carry out industrial park
development related activities as an investor;
customs territory means the territory of
Ethiopia in which the conventional customs
laws relevant to the Industry Park of the
country are applicable;
industrial park customs controlled area means
an area that is part of the industrial park where
customs has the power to control but deemed to
fall outside the customs territory;
applicable law means any proclamation,
regulations or directives applicable within
Industrial Park supplementing or being
interpreted in light of this Proclamation and the
Industrial Park Regulation;
Regulation means the Regulations issued by
the Council of Ministers to implement this
Proclamation;
tripartite modality means the arrangement by
which the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs,
Employers of Industrial Park Developer,
Enterprise and employees representatives
address labor issues through constructive
consultations;
     ai     9.97 Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39 ,9"- April, 2015 .................. page 8212
.  "  26/  basic utilities means industrial park related
     utility such as water, electric power, telephone,
    AS gas and other similar utilities specified in the
    regulation;
5/      
      
8. PAPE 
    : -
8/   
    !
Gl     
27/ person means any natural or juridical person;
28/ any expression in the masculine gender
includes the feminine.
3. Scope of application
The provisions of this Proclamation shall, uniformly in
the territory of Ethiopia, apply to the federal industrial
park activities or activities undertaken in connection
with them as well as to any person conducting any
activity in the federal industrial park.
4. Objectives
This Proclamation shall have the following objectives:
I/ regulating the designation, development and
operation of Industrial Park;
2/contributing towards of the
countrys technological and industrial infrastructure;
the development
3/encouraging sector
private participation in
manufacturing industries and related investments;
4/enhancing the competitiveness of the countrys
economic development; and
5/creating ample job opportunities, and achieve
sustainable economic development.
2-. :     dif     9.9 Federal Negarit Gazette No, 39 9% April, 2015 .................  8213
  PART TWO
     RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF INDUSTRIAL
   : : -.7:7: : : LAR
.    S. Rights of an Industrial Park Developer
    Any Industrial Park Developer shall have the right to:
8/     1/ design, construct, develop, exploit industrial park and
/       2/ sub-lease developed industrial park land;
/     3/ rent or sell to industrial park enterprises his
     immovable assets, buildings and rooms built within
    Hee ish parks:     YHA orion
Pris       in the regulation for manufacturing, office,
8/     4/ enter into sub-lease agreement for the development,
   operation and promotion of industrial park land;
8/      5/ operate, maintain and promote industrial park in
    accordance with industrial park development
      6/ employ Ethiopian citizens and foreigners in
accordance with the regulation;
  7/ participate in financial markets in order to obtain
      loan, fund guarantees and other financial resources in
- AAT    the manner provided for in the Regulations issued
    pursuant to this Proclamation and other applicable
     laws;
28-     di     .
Federal Negarit Gazette [40. 39 ,9- April, 2015
 64 44 44846... page 8214
/  
8/     
%    
 : -
 Poop:  
/      
   !
8/ provide service to industrial park enterprises engaged
within the industrial parks, in accordance with the
commission agreements reached with the utility
suppliers, collect charges and fees; the details shall
be specified in the regulation;
9/ enjoy tax and customs duty exemptions and other
incentives granted under applicable laws.
6. Oblisati { an Industrial Park Devel
industrial park developer shall have the
obligation to:
1/ construct immovable property with the industrial
park, on-site infrastructure, office space and other
facilities for the Commissions one-stop shop use
and for the Revenues and Customs Authority as
may be required by the permit and the Industrial
Park Developer or Industrial Park Operator
Agreement;
2/ facilitate conditions the
participation of domestic training institutions in
the design works of industrial park development;
necessary for
3/ commence development within the period
specified in the industrial park development
agreement;
4/ adhere to the performance requirements for the
phased development of the Industrial Park as well
as any financial obligations and time schedule for
capital and debt financing, specified in the permit;
5/ produce document envisaging their financial
source trustworthiness;
 85.       8   97 Federal Negarit Gazene No.39 9" April, 2015 ................. page 8215
'     6/ shall not transfer the un-developed industrial
     park land in any manner to third party;
/       7/ comply with any other obligations specified in
AS     this Proclamation, the Regulation, environmental
  ANT  protection legislation and other applicable laws,
! and the permit;
/     8/ replace expatriate personnel or professional by
    Ethiopian nationals by transferring required
      knowledge and skills through specialized
.     7. Rights of an Industrial Park Operator
A    
-  
  !
Any Industrial Park Operator in the Industrial Park
shall have the right to:
1/
2/
3/
4/
transfer on sub-lease developed industrial park land
and let or sub-let immovable assets, provide utilities
and other services, on behalf of the industrial park
developer, provide basic service and other service
with charge;
operate, manage, maintain and promote the Industrial
Park in accordance with the industrial park
operatorls agreement;
employ both Ethiopian and foreign nationals in
accordance with the Regulation;
use this
such other rights provided for [
Proclamation, regulation and other applicable laws.
    dil     . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39 9" April, 2015 ...................885
8216
.    
&/
af
#/
5/
 -  -  an
!
 8,4)01) {an Ind ial Park O
Any Industrial Park Operator in the Industrial Park shall
have the obligation to:
1/ adhere to this Proclamation, the Regulations, and the
6/
7/
permit terms;
in accordance with industrial park permit, operate,
maintain and promote the industrial park and keep
its assets and utilities in operational condition ;
maintain readily available office space and
facilities for one-stop shop and customs service;
refrain from transferring the un-developed
industrial park land in any manner to third party,
with the exception of the Corporations transfer of
industrial land to other industrial park developer;
link domestic manufacturing enterprises with
industrial park enterprises in order to develop their
technological capacities and to benefit them from
international market;
comply with the social and environmental as well
as any other obligations as provided for in this
Proclamation, the Regulation, applicable laws, its
permit or agreement;
replace expatriate personnel or professional by
Ethiopian nationals by transferring required
knowledge and skills through specialized trainings.
8.     8     99 Federal Negarit Gazette ?16. 39 9" April, 2015...................885 8237
   THREE
 INVESTMENT
RB. -. 9. 1
    Any Industrial Park Enterprise shall have the right to:
  : - 1/ may obtain Industrial Park Permit in order to carry out
/     investment activities within Industrial Park. The
    manner of submission of application for Permit, the
    requirements thereof and the making of decision
    ! thereon shall be specified in the Regulation:
-  - . 
/     (8)  2/ obtain tax, customs duty and other incentives as
      provided in applicable laws, upon obtaining the permit
     indicated in sub-article 1 of this Article
/     3/ freely exercise investment activities in accordance the
  -  terms and conditions of the permit, excluding those
    endangering public order, moral, safety and security
     as well as human and animal health and plant life; the
    details shall be defined in the Regulations;
/      4/ acquire land on a sub-lease basis and possess, sell own
buildings, rent other immovable assets, export out of
the Country, import into any industrial parks, sell in
the industrial park customs controlled area goods and
services pursuant to customs treatment specified in
this Proclamation and other applicable laws.
    8  8   .
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39 9" April, 2015 ...............
--page 8238
I.    
  : -
/    DAMS!
-     
 -  TART  
10-090050 {the Industrial Park E 1
Any Industrial Park Enterprise shall have the obligation
to:
commence
development within the
period
specified in the industrial park enterprise permit
and agreement;
carry out the investment activities specified in the
permit;
allow entrepreneurship trainings of the technical
and and
vocational education
trainings,
collaboration trainings and that of higher
education;
comply with its obligations set forth in this
Proclamation and the Regulation in general and the
environmental, social and employeer obligations in
particular contained therein and in other applicable
laws;
11. Administrative Measures of the Board against
Speculation
In the event that an Industrial Park Developer or
an Industrial Park Operator transfers on lease or
sub-lease basis the land it acquired in violation of
the terms of the respective Industrial Park permits
and the agreements or Proclamation and the
Regulation without the prior approval of the
Board administrative measure, shall be taken in
accordance with directives issued by the Board.
        % . Federal Negarit Gazette, No. 39 9% April, 2015 .................. page B219
/     (8) 
.   
 -  
 :  !
/     (6)
2/ The provision of sub-article (1) of this Article
shall have no implication with respect to sub-
lease agreement reached between industrial park
enterprise and the industrial park developer or
industrial park operator on developed parcel of
land within the industrial park development site.
3/ For the purpose of implementing this provision,
the Board shall keep track of the annual fair
market lease value of all Industrial Park land.
12. Business Registration and Compliance
1/Any prospective Industrial Park Developer, Industrial
Park Operator or Industrial Park Enterprise shall
submit the following documents to the Commission in
relation to its establishment and registration:
a) an application form duly signed by the owner or
agent of the prospective Industrial Park related
investor;
b) notarized memorandum and Articles of
associations;
) if a branch, documents ascertaining the
registration and legal personality of the parent
company in the country of origin.
2/The industrial park developer, industrial park
operator or industrial park enterprise registered
pursuant to sub-articles (1) of this Article shall
acquire legal personality.
3/ The details pertaining to Industrial Park business
registration and related operating approvals and
licensing, reporting, inspections, bankruptcy and
liquidation envisaged under this Proclamation shall
be specified in the Regulation,
1
#2          . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39 9" April, 2015
 ....... -8 8220
  PART FOUR
 - INDUSTRIAL PARK WORK PERMITS AND
      RESIDENCE
 -   . 
8.     
13 Industrial Park Expatriate Entry, Work Permits and
Residency
1/ Any industrial park developer, industrial park
operator or industrial park enterprise may hire
expatriate personnel for its top management,
supervisory, training or other technical functions.
2/ The entry, work permit and certificate of residency of
expatriate personnel and their dependents shall be
expedited through a coordinated function of the
Commission as part of one-stop shop or Department
for Immigration and Nationality Affairs and the
Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs; the modalities of
which shall be specified in the Regulations.
14. Eligibility for a Certificate of Industrial Park
1/ Any natural person, whether an Ethiopian or foreign
national, may become an industrial park resident
subject to meeting the requirements as specified in
the Regulation.
2/ The classification and issuance of industrial park
residence permit and work permit shall be specified
in the regulation.
i " 11 Gaz | |   vermis PEGE
        5 . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39 9% April, 2015 pag
B221
1%.    
: -
/  -   
15. Industrial Park Resident Rights
A
 industrial park resident shall have the right to:
live and reside in the area designated for the duration
specified in the Certificate of Residency;
import personal effects free from customs duties, and
other charges while staying in industrial park; the
details of which shall be specified in the Regulation;
establish community
better
understanding of Industrial Park Developer and
Industrial Park Operator in respect of facilities and
committees for
services;
transfer his personal effects to the other industrial park
residents; the details of which shall be specified in the
Regulation;
enjoy such other rights to be specified in [6
Regulation.
16. Indystrial Park Resident Obligations
An industrial park resident has the obligation to:
unless otherwise provided under this Proclamation,
pay all applicable customs duties, tariffs, taxes and
other appropriate charges for any imported goods;
pay personal income tax and other taxes in accordance
with applicable laws;
respect obligation provided in other laws.
THEYRE
    ai    5 . | Federal Negant Gazette No 39 9"  2015 .........
.... page 8222
TZ.     
 3   
 |   
  APT 
17. Speculation by Industrial Park Residents
Administrative M f the C =
In
the event an industrial park resident transfers its
industrial park immoveable property to a third party in
violation of the terms of the Certificate of Industrial Park
Residency, this Proclamation or the Regulation, the
Commission may take the following administrative
measures:
revoke the certificate of Industrial Park Residency;
cause return of assets which have been received
from industrial park developer or industrial park
operator while he was resident;
impose on the industrial park resident the payment
of rents on such assets, for a period of up to 30
days.
18. Revocation of Certificate of Industrial Park
1/ The Commission may, subject to providing 90 days
prior notice and due process safeguards, especially
after administrative hearing, revoke certificate of
Industrial Park Residency for the following reasons:
a) if the industrial park resident fails to meet the
of
Regulation, operating rules and procedures,
requirements this Proclamation, the
certificate of Industrial Park Residency or any
other applicable law; or
  .      BE . - Federal Negarit Gazette . 39 9" April, 2015 .. ....... --.885 8223
)     ) if the certificate of industrial park residency is
    obtained through misrepresentation or 
     provided false information or declaration;
/     2/ The revocation certificate of industrial
park
    residency entails cessation of entitlement to any
    rights by the Resident; and the ceased immovable
    property shall revert to the Industrial Park
  -   Developer or Industrial Park Operator as the case
  -  a fo
/     3/ The resident whose industrial park resident
     certificate has been revoked or who leaves the park
    may sell his personal effects upon payment of
     customs duties and taxes.
8/    - 4/ The Commission may also impose further
   administrative measures as specified in the
  Regulation.
  PART FIVE
NATIONAL TREATMENT
8.    
19. National Treatment
      Without prejudice to the provisions of other applicable
    laws of the country with respect to a foreign investor,
     any foreign investor individually or jointly with
     Ethiopian may participate as Industrial Park Developer,
    Industrial Park Operator or Industrial Park Enterprise.
: :
8/      
   52/
 5   ()  
()  ()  
 3--          . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39,9" April, 2015 ................ -5 8224
.   20. Guarantee and Protection
&/       1/ No Industrial Park investments may be expropriated
     unless otherwise required for public purpose, and
   subject to prompt payment of adequate
compensation.
.  
/      2/ The compensation shall be paid in any convertible
     currency in the international financial markets if the
      investor is foreign investor.
/       3/ Any unlawful expropriation shall entitle the
     Industrial Park Developer, Industrial Park Operator
 '-  i  or Industrial Park Enterprise to the restitution of its
aud  assets or investment together with reasonable interest
Hed   REY THEFT rate calculated as of the time the unlawful
      expropriation until restitution of such property.
/         4/ The provisions of appropriate law shall be applicable
      with respect to manner of expropriation and what
 AG -  44.99%, constitutes unlawful expropriation, compensation and
 restitution,
8.   
 '  - - Any Industrial Park Developer or Industrial Park
 -    Operator or Industrial Park Enterprise subject to the laws
fth hall:
 -  -   | " He county, shal
: : -
be entitled to borrow funds from banks abroad and
domestic financial institutions;
be allowed to list its stocks, bonds and other
securities on foreign security markets;
have the right to make remittances, in accordance
with paragraph (a) to (g) of sub-article (1) of Article
26 of the Investment Proclamation No. 769/2012, in
a convertible foreign currency at the prevailing rate
of exchange on the date of remittance; details of
FREER         BAT 99 Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39 9 April, 2015.............. -- page 8325
    which shall be specified in the regulation
  LARL 31x
    ACCESS TO LAND AND ENVIRONMENTAL
EROTECTION
a/
.
22. A   { Ind ial Par]
Ilmmoveable Asset
1/ The industrial park developer may possess industrial
park through 16856
land system and transfer
developed industrial park land through sub-lease.
2/ The industrial park operator may possess and
administer, upon approval by the Board, the
industrial park land which he has acquired through
agreement from industrial park developer.
3/ The industrial park enterprise may possess land
within the industrial park land which he has obtained
through agreement from industrial park developer or
industrial park operator upon approval and issuance
of investment permit by the Commission.
4/ The restrictions in terms and tenure of land and use
of urban or rural land and bidding system shall not
apply on industrial park land.
5/ The details regarding industrial park land site
registration, plot leasing, sub-leasing, 5[5
development, construction, safety and supply of
utilities shall be specified in the Regulation.
6/ Any Industrial Park Developer, Industrial Park
Operator or Industrial Park Enterprise has the right to
mortgage its developed land, other immovable or
movable asset, which commensurate to the
#5
    8     . - Federal Negarit Gazette 6. 39 ,9"- April, 2015............
.... page 8236
    |
- 
9.  
development invested on the land, in order to obtain
loan from financial institutions; the details of which
shall be specified in the Regulations.
The industrial park developer or industrial park
operator may not, except to an industrial park
enterprise, transfer a leased and developed industrial
park land to third parties without a written
permission of the Board.
23. Building Norms
Notwithstanding the provisions of other laws, norms or
standards in respect of development of Industrial Park
land, infrastructure and the construction of Industrial
Park building and structures, shall be specified in the
Regulations in order to ensure proper project design,
planning, construction, management of Industrial Park,
land development, management and related project
supervision and quality control.
24.
Environmental Regulations
The federal and regional environmental legislations
shall apply within industrial parks.
The Ministry of Environment and Forest shall
establish an office within industrial parks for the
application, supervision, protection and enforcement
of environmental norms, standards, safeguards,
management and mitigation plans within the
Industrial Parks;
The details regarding environmental obligations of an
Industrial Park shall be specified in the Regulation.
 25.     Af     . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39 9" April, 2015 ............. page 8227
5.    25. Industrial Park Designation and Modification
8/     1/ An industrial park shall be designated by the Board.
/    2/ The Board in designating the Industrial Parka shall
)   !
5    
5.  
al     
consider:
a) the nature of the proposed project;
b) the intended size and perimeter of the proposed
) clearance from encumbrance, proximity to
industrial inputs and infrastructure,
conduciveness to become population center and
the nature of project including availability of
medical and recreational center,
d) compatibility with master plan, land use and the
like.
3/ the details of designation procedures shall be
specified in the Regulations;
4/ any modification to and revocation of an Industrial
Park shall be determined by the Board.
26 . Requirements for Selection of Industrial Park
The selection of industrial park developer shall be
effected in accordance with the regulation.
27.0ne-Stop Shop
1/ The services provided by competent authorities in any
Industrial Park shall be offered through One-Stop
Shop in an efficient and streamlined manner.
2/The Commission shall provide one-stop shop service
within the industrial parks; bring into line other
competent organs and co-ordinate their day-to-day
functions.
    af     . - Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39 ,9 April, 2015..............
.... page 8225
/ -   
2.  
8/     FEELIN
()   
El    
28.
3/The competent authorities shall maintain their
mandates in the course of discharging their specific
functions in the one-stop shop,
4/Details relating to one-stop shop services shall be
specified in the Regulation.
Labor Affairs
1/ Labor Proclamation No 377/2003 (as amended) shall
be applicable in any Industrial Park;
2 /Without prejudice to sub-article (1) of this Article
labor contract may be negotiated between the
employer and employee taking into account the
Industrial Parks peculiar feature;
3/The Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs shall
establish the rules and procedures on labor issues in
consultation with the Ministry of Industry on the basis
of tripartite modality the details of which shall be
specified in the Regulation;
4/The Ministry of Industry shall organize technical and
vocational training program in collaboration with the
concerned government entities and Industrial Park
Developer (operator) whenever necessary;
5/The Ministry of Industry shall facilitate technology
transfer and skills development in general and
domestic manufacturing sector capacity building in
particular mainly through clustering and other best
practice approaches.
 -  - 
2#/ ()  
 -  - . 
5/    
9-       5   . | Federal Negarit (382686 No. 39 9% April, 2015... ... page 8229
PART SEVEN
      REGULATORY ORGANS AND GRIEVANCE
EROCEDURE
8.  29. Regulatory Organs
B  -  -  -  1/ The Board shall designate and oversee the
administration and supervision of Industrial Parks.
The Board shall decide on complaints submitted by
any Industrial Park Developer, Park
Operator or Industrial Park Enterprise challenging
Industrial
decision given by the Commission.
The manner in which the Board exercises its
regulatory mandate shall be specified in the
The Ministry of Industry shall ensure and supervise
that the industrial park enterprise are provided with
assistance such as extension services, technology,
inputs and marketing and method of manufacturing.
The Commission, in addition to exercising its
mandates under Investment
Proclamation No.
769/2012 (as amended), shall issue permits to
Industrial Park Developer, Industrial Park Operator
or Industrial Park Enterprise; conclude agreements
with industrial park developer and industrial park
operator.
The detail functions of the the
Commission provided for in this Article shall be
Board and
 TT          . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39 9" April, 2015 ................. page 8230
a,      | 30.1ssuance of Reprimand, Suspension and Revocation of
Permit
)    -
)     () 
   POH 
   (1)   ()
)  !
  : 
1/The Board shall;
a) issue reprimand to industrial park developer or
industrial park operator, so as to take
rectification measure within the time limit
specified in the regulations, if he violates the
conditions set out in the permit, the regulations
or directives issued for the implementation of
this Proclamation or any other applicable law;
b) suspend the industrial
park developer or
industrial park cperator pursuant to the time
limit specified in the regulations, until the
rectification measure is taken, if he fails to take
rectification measure pursuant to paragraph (a)
of this Article,
2/ Where an industrial park developer or industrial park
operator fails to take rectification measure pursuant
to paragraph (b) of sub-article (1) of this Article and
if one of the following causes materialized, the Board
may revoke the permit:
a) declared bankrupt,
b) provided that permit is given on the basis of
false information or misrepresentation;
6) fails to develop the land or to administer the
industrial
park, as the case
may be, in
accordance with agreement;
d) notifies to an appropriate organ termination of its
activities.
3/ Upon revocation of the permit, the land possessed by
such permit holder shall be reverted to the entity that
leased the same.
Eat idly
    8    RAE . Federal Negarit Gazette No. 39 9* April, 2015 .............
... --5 B231
  .  
 (5)   () 
  AS  
)  ]
)   CUNT  
4/ The revocation of the permit shall entail termination
of the industrial park development or industrial park
operation agreement.
5/ The Commission may:
a) issue reprimand to industrial park enterprise, so
as to take rectification measure within the time
limit specified in the regulations, if he violates
the conditions set out in the permit, the
regulations or directives issued for the
implementation of this Proclamation or any
other applicable law;
b) suspend the industrial park enterprise in
accordance the time limit specified in the
regulations, until the rectification measure is
taken, if he fails to take rectification measure
pursuant to paragraph (a) of this Article.
6/ Where an industrial park enterprise fails to take
rectification measure pursuant to paragraph (b) of
sub-article (5) of this Article and if one of the
following causes materialized, the Commission may
revoke the permit:
a) declared bankrupt;
) proved that permit is given on the basis of
 fails to develop the land in accordance with the
d) voluntarily notifies to appropriate organ the
termination of its activities.
8 - 2, ARCA    48     . Federal Negarit Gazette No.39 9% April, 2015 .......... page 8232
/      7/ The revocation under this Article shall deprive the
    permit holder from the rights provided under this
   Proclamation.
5  31. Complaint Handling
&    
/   - 
Ef     
i -      
El       
#/     
operator, industrial park enterprise or industrial park
resident shall have the right to lodge complaints to
the Commission against measures taken by any
competent authority,
2/ Any such complaint may be lodged with the
Commission within 30 days of the taking of the
measure in question.
3/ The Commission shall deliver its decision on the
complaint submitted to it within 30 days.
4/ The Board shall entertain complaint lodged against
the decision of the Commission if it is lodged within
30 days and shall give its decision within 30 days.
5/ An aggrieved party by the decision of the Board
may appeal within 30 days of receipt of the decision
to a court having jurisdiction.
6/ Details regarding the manner of lodging of
complaints and rendering of decision shall be
specified in the Regulation,
6 ROA    ai    5 . Federal Negarit Gazette No, 39 9% April, 2015 ........... .........88 8233
1 ali ;
  PART EIGHT
   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
/       
 ()  
/    1! [ 
   . 
/    : -
)
32. Powers to Issue Regulation and Directive
1/ The Council of Ministers may issue regulation with
respect to incentive package applicable to industrial
parks and other regulations necessary.
2/ The Board may issue directives necessary for the
implementation of this Proclamation and the
regulation issued pursuant to sub-article (1) of this
Article,
33. Transitory Provision
1/ Any existing industrial zone or information
technology park, shall be presumed as industrial park
upon entry into force of this Proclamation provided
they meet the designation criteria and be governed by
this Proclamation.
2/ The prior:
a) agreements entered into by the Government with
the industrial zone, industrial park developer or
with the industry park operator;
b) incentives given by the Government to the
industry zone, industry park developer, industry
park operator or industry park enterprise;
shall continue to be applied.
3/ Any prior application in respect of the development
and operation of industrial development zones or
industrial parks shall be deemed pending before the
Commission pursuant to this Proclamation and
regulations issued hereunder.
]
         . - Federal Negarit Gazette No 39 9% April, 2015......
series PRES 8234
AE APE  
  '  
    ENE .
4/ The Industrial Parks Development Corporation shall
be presumed as established pursuant to this
Proclamation,
34. Inapplicable laws
No proclamation, regulation, directive or customary
practice, inconsistent with this Proclamation shall have
force and effect, in respect of matters provided for in this
35. Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of
Publication in the Federal Negarit Gazette.
Done at Addis Ababa, this 9" day of April, 2015.
MULATU TESHOME (Dr. )
PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA