   

  
FEDERAL NEGARIT GAZETTE
OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA
    FX
   8      
     
26" Year No.28
ADDIS ABABA 2TM Day of April, 2020.
  / .
Content
Proclamation No. 1180/2020
PATANT oT APE  " | Investment Proclamation ............ c. cccooo..... Page 12383
  / PROCLAMATION NO, 1150/2020
INVESTMENT PROCLAMATION
 
    
      
Unit Price
RECOGNIZING that increasing the role of private
sector investment in all sectors of the economy including in
productive and enabling sectors has become necessary to
accelerate the economic development of the country, ensure
its sustainability, strengthen domestic production capacity
and thereby improve the living standards of its people;
WHEREAS it has become necessary to create an
economic framework that fast-tracks the global
competitiveness of the National economy, increases export
performance, generates more and better employment
opportunities, and facilitates sustainable and entwined
linkage among various economic sectors;
  .. 
Negarit G. P. O. Box 80001
      8  ELIE .
12384
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 28 April 2 2020 ..... page
    -
  #(8)  
WHEREAS it has become necessary to further increase
and diversify foreign investment inflow to accelerate inward
transfer and diffusion of knowledge, skill, and technology;
RECOGNIZING that it has become necessary to
maximize linkages between foreign and domestic
investments, promote equitable distribution of investments
among regions, and leverage foreign capital to promote the
competitiveness of domestic investors;
RECOGNIZING that it has become essential to put in
place a system of monitoring and supervision to ensure that
investments deliver on promised potentials stated in
National Investment Objectives and are operated in
accordance with the law;
WHEREAS the investment administration system has to
be transparent, predictable, and efficient to increase
investment attraction, retention, and expansion;
WHEREAS, to these ends, it has become necessary to
revise the existing law on investment;
NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Article
55(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia, it is hereby proclaimed as follows:
12385
       8  ELIE . Federal Negarit Gazette No.28 April 27" 2020 ...... page
  PART ONE
 GENERAL
.  1. Short Title
     /
.
/
8/
"     
 ATL:   
"      
  "   
   PPAR
)  
)      
) 
)   
This Proclamation may be cited as the Investment
Proclamation No1180/2020TM.
2. Definitions
In this Proclamation, unless the context otherwise requires:
1/ Investment means expenditure of capital in cash or
in kind or in both by an investor to establish a new
enterprise, or to acquire, in whole or in part, or to
expand or upgrade an existing enterprise;
2/ Enterprise means an undertaking established for
profit-making;
3/ Capital means local or foreign currency,
negotiable instrument, machinery or equipment,
building, working capital, property right, intellectual
property right, or other tangible or intangible
business assets;
4/ Investor means a Domestic or Foreign investor
who has invested capital in Ethiopia;
5/ Domestic Investor means any one of the
following who has invested capital in Ethiopia:
a) An Ethiopian National;
b) An Enterprise incorporated in Ethiopia and
wholly owned by Ethiopian National;
) The Government;
d) a Public Enterprise;
re
      8   .
12386
)
  -    )
 )    
)   - (5)   () 
     -
/       
  BOE
)     
  - (8)   () ()
 ()   
e) A cooperative society established as per the
relevant law;
f) A Foreign National or Foreign Enterprise treated
as domestic investor as per the relevant law or
international treaty ratified by Ethiopia;
8) An Enterprise incorporated in Ethiopia jointly
between any of the investors specified under Sub-
article (5) paragraphs (a) to (f) of this Article;
h) A Foreign National or Foreign Enterprise accorded
a domestic investor investment permit as per laws
which were in effect when the permit was issued
but which have since been repealed and continues
to operate in Ethiopia, provided that this applies
only in respect of investments that are operational
at the time of enactment of this Proclamation;
i) Descendant of a foreign national specified under
Sub-article (5) paragraph (h) of this Article,
provided that this applies only in respect of
investments specified in the same Sub-article;
6/ Foreign Investor means any one of the following
who has invested foreign capital in Ethiopia:
a) A Foreign National;
b) An Enterprise in which a Foreign National has an
ownership stake;
) An Enterprise incorporated outside of Ethiopia by
any investor;
d) An Enterprise established jointly by any of the
investors specified under Sub-article (6)
paragraphs (a), (b) or () of this Article; or
6) An Ethiopian permanently residing abroad and
preferring treatment as a Foreign investor;
Federal
12387
Negarit Gazette No. 28 April 2 2020 ..... page
Z/      
/ "    
8/  "    
   "  
)    
   NAT:
7/
Public Enterprise means an enterprise wholly
owned by the government;
Expansion or Upgrading means increasing
in volume, by at least 50 percent of the attainable
production or service rendering capacity of an
existing enterprise, or increasing in variety by at
least 100 percent by introducing new production
or service rendering line of an existing enterprise,
or increment by both;
9/ Transfer of Technology means the transfer of
10/
systematic knowledge for the manufacture of a
product, the application or improvement of a
process or for rendering service, including
management and technical know-how as well as
marketing technologies, but may not extend to
transactions involving mere sale or lease of
goods;
Export-Oriented Non-equity Based Foreign
Enterprise Collaboration means a hundred
percent export-oriented contractual agreement
between a domestic investor and foreign
enterprise in which the foreign enterprise
provides, among others, all or some of the
following:
a) Guaranteed external market access;
b) Production know-how of products for export
market;
) Export business management know-how;
d) Export marketing know-how;
e) Strategies for the supply of raw materials and
intermediate inputs needed for export
products;
12388
/ DAA
1=)
=
~
  GEE)  
NCL      
"     GE 
:   
    " 
 "
   27/
11/ Government means the Federal Government or
a Regional State Administration;
12/ Region or Regional State Administration
means any Regional State specified under
Article 47(1) of the Constitution of the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and includes
Addis Ababa City Administration and Dire
Dawa City Administration;
13/ Board means the Ethiopian Investment Board
reestablished under Article 30 of this
Proclamation;
14/ Commission means the Ethiopian Investment
Commission reestablished under Article 35 of
this Proclamation;
15/ Council means the Federal Government and
Regional State Administrations Investment
Council ~established under Article 44 of this
16/ Appropriate Investment Organ means the
federal body
the
Commission, a government
out functions delegated by
carrying
Commission, or the relevant regional state
body issue
administration authorized to
investment permits or administer investments;
17/ Industrial Park shall have the meaning
assigned to it under Article 2/1/ of the Industrial
Parks Proclamation No. 886/2015:
18/ Any expression in the masculine gender includes
the feminine.
#
Federal Negarit Gazette No. 28 April 2 2020
12389
..... page
.  
       
-.  
8/    
)    - . 
)     - () 
 ()  ()   
)   - 
/   - (8)  
3.
Scope of Application
This Proclamation shall apply to all investments
carried out in Ethiopia except to investments in the
prospecting, exploration and development of minerals
and petroleum.
Jurisdiction
1/ The administration of the following investments
shall be under the jurisdiction of the Commission:
a) Wholly foreign owned investment;
b) Joint investment made by domestic and
foreign investors;
) Investment made by a foreign national, not
Ethiopian by origin, who is treated as a
domestic investor pursuant to Article 2(5)
paragraphs (8 to (i) of this Proclamation; and
d) Investment made in areas eligible for
incentives by a domestic investor who is
required to obtain a business license from an
appropriate Federal Body.
2/ Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-article (1)
of this Article, the issuance, renewal, amendment,
substitution, replacement and cancellation of
investment permits, and the issuance of investment
expansion or upgrading permits for air transport
services, the generation or transmission or
distribution of electric power, and the provision of
communications services shall be carried out by
the Ethiopian Civil Aviation Authority, the
Ethiopian Energy Authority, and the Ethiopian
Communications
Authority, respectively,
representing the Commission.
12390
/     
-
  -
   - (4)  ()
. 
/      
3/ The Ethiopian Civil Aviation Authority, the Ethiopian
Energy Authority, and the Ethiopian Communications
Authority shall:
a) Submit to the Commission a quarterly report
regarding services they rendered through their
Delegated Powers;
b) Coordinate with the Commission to undertake
studies identifying sectoral potentials, and sector
specific investment development strategies, and
engage in investment promotion works.
4/ Appropriate investment Organs of Regions shall have
jurisdiction to administer investments other than those
specified under Sub-articles (1) and (2) of this Article.
PART TWO
INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES
5. Investment Objectives
The investment objective of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia is to improve the living standard of
the peoples of Ethiopia by realizing a rapid, inclusive and
The
sustainable economic and social development.
particulars of the objective include the following:
1/ To enhance the competitiveness of the national
economy by promoting investments in productive
and enabling sectors;
2/ To create more and better employment opportunity for
Ethiopians and advance the transfer of knowledge,
skills and technology required for the development of
the country;
12391
/      3/ To increase foreign exchange earnings by encouraging
     the expansion in volume, variety and quality of the
    countrys export products and services,
8/       4/ To save foreign exchange through local production of
   import substitutes;
/       5/ To augment the role of the private sector in the
8 countrys economic development;
/       6/ To exploit and develop natural, cultural, and other
     resources of the country;
5/        7/ To create an integrated economy by strengthening
     inter-sectoral and foreign-domestic investment
linkages;
/       8/ To encourage socially and environmentally
     responsible investments.
  PART THREE
5. 
AREAS OF INVESTMENT, FORMS OF ENTERPRISE
AND CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS
6. Areas of Investment
1/- Subject to the provisions of this Article, any
investor may engage in any area of investment
except where it is contrary to law, moral, public
health or security.
2/ Areas of investment reserved for joint investment
with the Government, for domestic investors, and
for joint investment with domestic investors shall
be specified by Regulation.
12392
  - (8)  
      -
 (8  (  
5.    
.    
/    
]
7. Investments
3/ Except those reserved in accordance with Sub-
article (2) of this Article, all areas of investment
shall be open to foreign investors.
4/ The Board may revise the list of investment areas
specified as per Sub-articles (2) and (3) of this
Article as it deems it necessary.
Undertaken Jointly with (
Government
The Public Enterprises Holding and Administration
Agency or an authority statutorily mandated to
implement projects established by way of public-
shall receive
private-partnership, as appropriate,
investment proposals submitted by any private
investor intending to invest jointly with the
Government; it shall follow procedures established
under the pertinent laws for decision, and, upon
approval, designate a Public Enterprise or establish a
project company to invest as partner in the joint
investment.
8. Forms of Enterprise for Carrying out Investments
1/ Investments may be carried out in one of the
following Enterprises:
a) Sole proprietorship;
b) Enterprise established in Ethiopia or abroad;
6) Public Enterprise established in accordance
with the relevant 18%
d) Cooperative society formed in accordance
with the relevant law.
2/ Any investment made in the forms prescribed under
Sub-article (1) of this Article shall be registered in
accordance with the Commercial Code of Ethiopia
or other applicable law.
       8  ELIE .
12393
8.      
   - 
    (  )
/   - ()   
 .   
  BEAN (AT&L   )
)    (  ) 
)       #
 )   
8/      
   . 
3/ Any enterprise registered in Ethiopia having been
established abroad shall be governed by the
Commercial Code of Ethiopia and other laws
applicable to enterprises.
9. Minimum __ Capital Requirements for Foreign
Investors
1/ Any foreign investor, to be allowed to invest under
this Proclamation, shall be required to allocate a
minimum capital of USD 200,000.00 (two hundred
thousand) for a single investment project.
2/ Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-article (1) of
this Article, the minimum capital required of a
foreign investor jointly investing with a domestic
investor shall be USD 150,000.00 (one hundred
fifty thousand).
3/ Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-article (1) of
(15 Article, the minimum capital required of a foreign
investor investing in architectural or engineering
works or related technical consultancy services,
technical testing and analysis or in publishing works
shall be:
a) USD 100,000.00 (one hundred thousand) if the
investment is made on his own;
b) USD 50,000.00 (fifty thousand) if the investment
is made jointly with a domestic investor.
4/ The minimum capital requirement under this Article
shall not apply to:
a) Foreign investor re-investing his profits or
dividends generated from his existing enterprise
in any investment area open for foreign
investors:
12394
&/    
 ()) () )  ()  
) -   - 
   AG
b) Persons elected as members of board of
directors following the change of a private
limited company to share company; and
c) A foreign investor buying the entirety of an
existing enterprise owned by a foreign investor
or the shares therein.
5/ Any foreign investor bringing investment capital into the
country shall have such capital registered by the
appropriate investment organ with in one year and obtain a
certificate of registration. The appropriate investment
organ shall send a copy of the certificate to the National
Bank of Ethiopia.
PART FOUR
INVESTMENT PERMIT
10. Requirement and Issuance of Investment Permit
1/ The following investors shall be required to obtain
investment permits:
a) Foreign investors;
b) Domestic and foreign investors investing jointly;
) Investors investing as domestic investors pursuant
to Article 2 Sub-article (5) paragraphs (8), (),
(h) and (i) of this Proclamation;
) Domestic investors who, investing in areas
eligible for incentives, seek to be
beneficiaries of such incentives; and
12395
/   - (8)   () 
-   
B/     
2/
3/
6) An investor seeking to expand or upgrade an
existing investment, provided that the investment
is eligible for incentives and the investor seeks to
be beneficiary of such incentives.
Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-article
(1)
paragraph () of this Article, a foreign national of
Ethiopian origin treated as a domestic investor shall
have the right to invest without acquiring investment
permit in areas not eligible for incentives, or, in areas
eligible for incentives, by waiving his right to claim
incentives.
Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-article (1) of this
Article, a foreign investor seeking to buy an existing
enterprise in order to operate it in its current state or to
buy shares of an existing enterprise shall obtain prior
approval from the Commission. The Commission shall
not deny or delay the approval sought without sufficient
cause.
4/ No investor may, at any time, hold domestic and foreign
investor permits simultaneously.
11. Renewal of Investment Permit
1/ An investment permit shall be renewed annually
until the investor commences marketing his
products or services. There shall be no need for
renewal of investment permit after issuance of
business license.
2/ An application for renewal of investment permit
shall be submitted within one month after the end
of a period of one year for which the permit was
valid.
12396
mm)
/  
 we  
8/   - ()  
.     
/ 
12. Transfer of
3/ An investment permit shall be revoked if an
investor fails to commence implementation of his
project within two years of being issued the
permit or has delayed the completion of the
project by two years from the time that will be
agreed with the appropriate investment organ.
4/ Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-article (3) of
this Article, the appropriate investment organ may
renew the investment permit if it is convinced of
the existence of sufficient cause prompting delay
in the commencement or completion of the project.
Investment Project Under
Implementation
Any investor wishing to transfer to another investor a
project which is in implementation phase and for
which no business license has been issued shall
submit his request to the appropriate investment organ
and obtain the approval such organ. The appropriate
investment organ shall not deny or delay the approval
sought without sufficient cause. The detailed
conditions nessary to foe the implementation of this
provisions shall be specified by a Directive to be
enacted by a Commission.
13. Suspension or Revocation of Investment Permit
1/ The investment permit of an investor shall be
suspended if the investor:
a) Fails to submit accurate and timely information
or project implementation report requested by
the appropriate investment organ pursuant to this
Proclamation, or intentionally or negligently
presents incorrect report;
12397
Ia - ()   
)       
/  APS.  
/  -
)     - (8) 
    - (F)
    . 
b) Obtains the investment permit or secures its
renewal fraudulently or by submitting a false
information or statement;
) Uses the investment permit incompatibly with
the objective for which it was issued;
d) Fails, without good cause, to renew the permit
in accordance with the requirements specified
in this Proclamation and regulations issued
hereunder;
6) Commences project implementation but fails to
complete same within the time limit provided
under Article 11 Sub-article (3) of this
Proclamation and where it is believed that the
project will not be completed at all; or
f) Violates the provisions of this Proclamation, or
Regulations and Directives issued to implement
this Proclamation, or other pertinent Laws.
An investor whose permit is suspended shall be
given one year to take corrective measures.
The investment permit of an investor shall be
revoked if the investor:
a) Subject to the provision of Article 11 Sub-
article (4) of this Proclamation, fails to
commence investment project implementation
as per Article 11 Sub-article (3) of same;
b) Fails to rectify the issue that caused the
suspension of the investment permit within the
time given to him;
) Voluntarily forsakes his investment activity; or
d) Misuses or illegally transfers to a third-party
investment incentives granted pursuant to the
Pertinent Laws:
32
12398
=]
  -  - 
4/ The appropriate investment organ shall notify the
revocation measure it takes in accordance with this
Article to all concerned bodies. Upon revocation of
investment permit, the investor shall immediately lose
entitlement to all benefits.
5/ An investor whose investment permit is revoked shall
return all investment incentives he received to the
Ministry of Revenues, the Ethiopian Customs
Commission, the Ministry of Finance and other
pertinent organs within one month of the revocation.
6/ An investment permit shall only be suspended or
revoked by the appropriate investment organ that
issued the permit.
7/ A foreign Investor whose investment permit is revoked
may not be issued a new investment permit before the
lapse of one year since the date of the revocation.
8/ Administrative measures taken under this article shall
not affect the right of the Government to bring a
criminal action.
14. Duty to Report and Cooperate
Any investor who is issued an investment permit shall:
1/ Submit a quarterly progress report on the
implementation of his investment project to the
appropriate investment organ;
2/ Provide information concerning his investment
whenever requested by the appropriate investment
organ.
12399
.   
6/   
  - (8) 
8/       
BEART FIVE
REGISTRATT F TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER AND
LIABORATION AGREEMENTS WITH
DOMESTIC INVESTORS
15. Technology Transfer Agreement
1/ Any investor concluding a technology transfer
agreement in relation to his investment shall have the
agreement registered with the Commission.
2/ A technology transfer agreement that is not registered
16.
in accordance with Sub-article (1) of this Article shall
not have legal recognition with the Commission.
The Commission shall notify the relevant Federal
Executive Organs and copy the National Bank of
Ethiopia the registration of a technology transfer
agreement made in accordance with this Article.
Foreign Enterprise Collaboration Agreement for
Export Trade Without Capital ontribution
1/-Any domestic investor who concludes, in respect of
export, a collaboration agreement with a foreign
enterprise who does not contribute capital shall
have the
agreement registered with the
Commission.
2/ A collaboration agreement that is not registered in
accordance with Sub-article (1) of this Article shall
3/ The Commission shall notify the relevant Federal
Ethiopia registration of a collaboration
8
12400
Imm]
pa
/   
8     
    "
3
/   - (8)  () 
PART SIX
INVESTMENT INCENTIVES, GUARANTEES AND
PROTECTION, AND FACILITATION
17. Investment Incentives
Investment areas eligible for investment incentives as
well as the type and amount of investment incentives
shall be determined by a Regulation to be enacted by the
Council of Ministers.
18.0wnership of Immovable Property
1/ Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 390 to 393
of the Civil Code, a foreign investor or a foreign
national treated as domestic investor shall have the
right to own immovable property necessary for his
investment. Immovable property as used in this
provision does not include land.
2/ Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 390 to 393
national treated as domestic investor who owns large
investment may be allowed to own one dwelling
house. The detailed conditions necessary for the
implementation of this provision shall be specified by
a Regulation.
3/The provisions of Sub-articles (1) and (2) of this Article
shall be applicable to investors who have invested
prior to the adoption of this Proclamation.
12401
/     -
 (8)    
.3    
8/   
0)     - (
7]
19. Investment Guarantees and Protection
1/The Government may expropriate any investment
undertaken under this Proclamation for public
interest, in conformity with requirements of the
law, and on a non-discriminatory basis.
2/ In case of expropriation of an investment effected
pursuant to Sub-article (1) of this Article, adequate
compensation corresponding to the prevailing
market value shall be paid in advance.
20. Remittance of Funds
1/ Any foreign investor shall have the right, in respect of
his investment, to remit the following payments and
earnings out of Ethiopia in convertible foreign
currency at the prevailing exchange rate on the date
of transfer:
a) Profits and dividends accruing from his
investment;
) Principal and interest payments on external loans;
) Payment related to technology transfer agreement
registered in accordance with Article 15 of this
d) Payments related to collaboration agreement
registered in accordance with Article 16 of this
e) Proceeds from the transfer of shares or conferral
of partial or total ownership of an enterprise to
another investor;
f) Proceeds from the sale, capital reduction or
liquidation of an enterprise; and
g) Compensation paid to an investor pursuant to
Sub-article (2) of Article 19 of this
Proclamation.
12402
.      
2/ Notwithstanding the provision of Sub-article (1) of this
Article, a domestic investor investing jointly with a
foreign investor shall not be allowed to remit funds
earned from the investment out of Ethiopia.
3/ Expats employed for investments carried out pursuant to
this Proclamation whose permanent residence is outside
of Ethiopia may remit, in accordance with applicable
law, salaries accruing from their employment in
convertible foreign currency at the prevailing exchange
rate on the date of transfer.
21. External Loan and Foreign Currency Account
1/ Any investor may acquire external loan for his
investment as per the applicable Directive of the
National Bank of Ethiopia.
2/ Any investor may operate a foreign currency account
in Banksin Ethiopia for the purpose of its investment
as per the applicable Directive of the National Bank of
Ethiopia.
22. Employment of Expats and Work Permits
1/ Any investor may employ duly qualified foreigners
necessary for the operation of his investment in
positions of higher management, supervision, trainers
and other technical professions. However, foreigners
may be employed only when it can be ascertained that
Ethiopians
possessing similar qualification 
experience required by the sector are not available.
12403
/   - (2)  
  - 
/|      -
8/   - (8)  
 -   
yl
this Article, an investor may employ foreigners for
top management positions, including chief executive
officer, chief operation officer and chief finance
officer as necessary. The work permit of top
management foreign workers shall be renewed
without being required to comply with the conditions
specified in this Article in respect of other foreign
workers.
3/ A work permit may be issued to a cohabiting spouse
of any investor and a foreign worker employed
pursuant to Sub-article (1) of this Article.
4/ An investor who employs foreigners pursuant to
Sub-article (1) of this Article shall be responsible
for replacing, within a limited period of time, such
foreign workers by Ethiopians by arranging and
providing the necessary training.
5/ A work permit for employment in a certain position
may be issued for up to three years, and renewed
every year subject to verification, as appropriate,
that the investor has ascertained the non-
availability of Ethiopian workers with similar
qualification, and of the concrete measures taken
by the investor to train Ethiopian replacements.
6/ Where it is ascertained that a foreign worker is no
longer required for the position he is employed, the
Commission may decide not to renew or to cancel
the work permit.
7/ In collaboration with the Ministry of Trade and
Industry and the Ministry of Labour and Social
Affairs, the Commission shall prepare and
implement a working guideline regulating matters
related to:
88
12404
)   - ()   (V)
 ()     
I)      
8/     
    ( 
  )   
a) Ascertaining the necessity and professional
pertinence of expat employees;
b) The execution of training programs involving
Ethiopians that replace expat employees;
) Mechanisms for establishing the availability or
otherwise of suitable local workforce having
the required expertise; and
d) Procedures governing the issuance, refusal and
cancellation of work permits owing to reasons
related to matters listed under Sub-article (7)
paragraphs (a) to () of this Article or other
additional grounds.
8/ The Commission, in collaboration with the Ministry of
Trade and Industry, shall prepare and implement a
guideline regulating the duty of investors to design
and provide training programs and to ensure the
transfer of skills and knowledge to substitute
Ethiopian workers.
23. Yjsa Services
1/ The Commission or a delegated investment organ
may facilitate the processing of visa applications of
foreigners coming into Ethiopia for investment
purposes and that of the families (spouses, children
and parents) of investors undertaking investments
in Ethiopia.
2/ If a person, intending to enter into Ethiopia for
investment purposes, applies for a visa in a country
that is not his home country, visa may be issued to
him in that third country based on a support letter
the Commission may offer.
12405
     (3)
Z     
3/ An owner or shareholder of an investment
undertaken pursuant to this Proclamation may be
issued a five-year multiple visa based on
confirmation by the Commission.
4/ The General Manager, Board Member and top
Management of an Enterprise undertaking an
investment pursuant to this Proclamation, and the
top management of the parent or holding
company of the enterprise may be issued a three-
year multiple entry visa based on confirmation by
the Commission.
5/ No single stay of any foreigner entering Ethiopia
using multiple entry visa issued pursuant to this
Article may exceed ninety (90) days.
6/ The Commission shall work in cooperation with the
Immigration, Nationality and Vital Events Agency
and other appropriate government body for the
proper implementation of this Article.
24.0One Stop Service
1/ The Commission shall provide one-stop services to
investors it has issued investment permits pursuant to
relevant
this Proclamation; it shall coordinate
Agencies and synchronize their daily functions.
2/ Regional State investment Organs shall provide one-
stop services to investors they issued investment
permits in accordance with applicable Federal and
Regional State Laws.
12406
  BART SEVEN
 5   GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES AND SETTLEMENT OF
  INVESTMENT DISPUTES
AE.    25. Right to Lodge Complaint
5/     . . . .
1/ Any investor who has grievance in respect of his
     investment shall have the right to submit a
     complaint to the appropriate investment organ.
   (Z)    
   (3)    
2/ Any complaint submitted by an investor against a
final administrative decision shall be resolved
using speedy, equitable and efficient procedures.
3/ The grievance procedures provided in this part of
the Proclamation shall in respect of
apply
grievances against a final decision given by the
appropriate investment organ on application to
engage in investment.
26. Grievance Against the Commissions Decisions
1/ Any investor who has grievance against a final
administrative decision of the Commission can
submit a complaint to the Board.
2/ A written copy of the Commissions decision shall
be given to the investor within Seven (7) working
days from the date of decision.
3/ Any complaint submitted to the Board against a
final administrative decision of the Commission
shall be lodged within Thirty (30) working days
from the date the investor becomes aware of such
decision.
4/ The Board shall give decision on the complaint
submitted to it within Ninety (90) working days
from the date of submission of the complaint.
12407
5.      
(8)    
()     
/    - (8) 
     (9)
   - (8) 
    ()  
27. Complaints
5/ A written copy of the Board's decision shall be
given to the investor by the Secretariat of the
Board within Seven (7) working days from the date
of decision.
Against Decisions of
Government Executive Bodies
1/ Any investor undertaking investments pursuant to
this Proclamation shall have the right to submit a
complaint to the Commission against final
decisions of any federal government executive
body where such decisions significantly affect the
investments.
2/ A written copy of the final decision of any federal
Government Executive Body shall be given to the
investor within Seven (7) working days from the
date of decision.
3/ Any complaint submitted to the Commission
against a final administrative decision of a Federal
Government Executive Body shall be lodged
within Thirty (30) working days from the date the
investor becomes aware of the decision.
4/ The Commission shall engage with the government
body against whom a complaint is lodged under
Sub-article (1) of this Article and propose a
recommended solution in writing within Thirty
(30) days from the date of submission of the
complaint.
5/ A written copy of the Commissions recommended
solution proposed under Sub-article (4) of this
Article shall be given to the investor within Seven
(7) working days from the date the recommended
solution is tabled.
12408
   ()   
    (8)  
AL.   
6/ The investor may file a complaint to the Board
against the Commissions recommended solution
proposed under Sub-article (4) of this Article, or
where the Commission's recommended solution is
not accepted by the government body against
whom the complaint was submitted.
7/ Any complaint submitted to the Board pursuant to
Sub-article (6) of this Article shall be lodged
within thirty (30) working days from the date the
investor is notified of the recommended solution or
from the date the investor learns that the
government body against whom the complaint is
lodged has rejected the recommended solution.
8/ The Board shall give decision on the complaint
9/ Any Federal Government Body whom a decision of
the Board concerns shall have the duty to comply
with and Execute in accordance with the decision
of the Board.
28. Settlement of Investment Disputes
1/ Without prejudice to the right of access to justice
through a competent body with judicial power, any
dispute between an investor and the Government
involving investments effected pursuant to this
Proclamation will be resolved through consultation
or negotiation.
2/ The Federal Government may agree to resolve
investment disputes involving Foreign
investments through arbitration.
3/ Where a Foreign investor chooses to submit an
investment dispute to a competent body with
Judicial Power or arbitration, the choice shall be
deemed final to the exclusion of the other.
12409
#.  
9.   
)  APE:   
PART EIGHT
INVESTMENT ADMINISTRATI RGA
29. Investment Administration Organs
The Organs of investment administration shall
comprise the following:
1/ The Ethiopian Investment Board;
2/ The Ethiopian Investment Commission;
3/ The Federal Government and Regional State
Administrations Investment Council; and
4/ Investment administration Organs established
pursuant to Regional Laws.
30. Ethiopian Investment Board
The Ethiopian Investment Board is hereby re-established
under this Proclamation.
31. Powers and Duties of the Board
1/ The Board shall:
a) Exercise Powers and Duties specified under this
Proclamation, Regulations issued hereunder, and
other laws enacted to regulate the designation,
operation and supervision of industrial parks;
b) Supervise the implementation of this Proclamation
and follow up activities of the Commission;
) Initiate Policies on matters pertaining to
investments;
d) Recommend, as necessary, amendments to this
Proclamation and Regulations issued hereunder;
12410
)  -    
   -  
   - (2)   ()
6) Issue Directives necessary for implementation of
this Proclamation and Regulations issued
hereunder; follow up and oversee the
implementation of the Directives;
f) Decide on complaints lodged by investors against
final administrative decisions of the Commission
or other Federal Government Executive Bodies
submitted in accordance with the grievance
procedures specified in this Proclamation;
g) Put forward to the pertinent Government Organ an
assessment-based recommendation regarding the
type and extent of investment incentives to be
granted to investments and the criteria for
identifying investments eligible for incentives;
) Decide, in consultation with relevant public and
private sector stakeholders, to open to foreign
investors those investment areas reserved for joint
investment with the government, or to domestic
investors, or for joint investment between
domestic and foreign investors, as well as restrict
foreign investment in areas open to foreign
investors where such decision is justified by
public interest considerations.
2/ Any decision the Board adopts pursuant to Sub-article
(8) paragraph (h) of this Article shall take immediate
effect. The decisions of the Board shall be made
accessible to the public within one month in published
or other forms.
12411
)  ...........................
.... : : :5:13955555555555555555........  
   .. 
...  5959-59-9-.555-....  
)  ..................  
32. Members of the Board
1/ The Board shall be constituted of the following
Thirteen members:
a) The Prime Minister.................... Chairperson;
b) A Government official designated by the Prime
15(5.................................. Vice Chairperson;
) Eight Government Officials having core or
related administration mandate over trade,
industry, services, finance, revenues, agriculture,
energy, and other relevant sectors... Members;
d) Two representatives designated by the private
SECTOT Lotte ie ee eee Members;
6) The Commission's Commissioner Member and
Secretary.
2/ The Chairperson may invite other relevant bodies to
meetings of the Board where it is deemed necessary.
3/ Private sector representatives designated to be members
of the Board:
a) Shall not vote in the Boards decisions;
b) Shall serve a term of two years and may be
reappointed for one more term;
) Shall participate in the Boards proceedings and
discharge their responsibility free from any direct or
indirect situations creating conflict of interest; they
shall recuse themselves from deliberations of the
Board in respect of matters which involve their
personal interest or give rise any form of conflict of
interest;
12412
af.  
/    . 
   -
8.   
4/ The Board shall adopt a Directive determining the
procedure for its overall working, the conduct of
meetings, the submission of matters it considers, and
the rendering of decisions.
5/ The Commission shall serve as Secretariat of the Board:
the Secretariat shall organize its own staff.
33. Meetings of the Board
1/ The Board shall meet once every quarter but may meet
additionally as it deems it necessary.
2/ There shall be quorum where more than half of the
members of the Board are present at any meeting.
3/ Decisions of the Board shall pass by majority vote; the
Chairperson shall have a casting vote in case of a tie.
34. Investment Advisory Committee
The Board may, as necessary, establish Investment
Advisory Committees, define their Mandates
and designate their Membership and Chairpersons.
35. Ethiopian Investment Commission
The Ethiopian Investment Commission is hereby
reestablished as an autonomous Federal Government
Agency having its own legal personality and being
accountable to the Prime Minister.
36. Head Office
The Commission shall have its head office in Addis
Ababa and may, as necessary, have branch or liaison
office elsewhere.
12413
5)
El     
   PALA:
-     
37.0bjective
The Objectives of the Commission shall be to establish a
conducive investment climate, attract and retain
investments, and implement a transparent and efficient
investment administration system.
38. Powers and Duties of the Commission
The Commission shall:
1/ Exercise Powers and Duties specified under this
Proclamation, Regulations and Directives issued
hereunder, as well as other laws enacted to
administer and regulate industrial parks;
2/ Serve as nucleus for matters of investment and lead,
promote, coordinate and enhance activities thereon;
3/ Initiate policy and implementation measures required
to create a conducive and competitive investment
climate, and follow up execution of same upon
approval;
4/ Lead investment promotion activities, compile a list
of potential investors, and implement targeted
investor recruitment work;
5/ Rebrand and build the countrys image as a
preferred investment location; identify and compile
investment opportunities in each sector indicating
investment value propositions and business success,
and prepare profile and promotional documents on
each sector and disseminate same; organize
workshops and seminars locally or abroad; and,
participate in similar events and conduct trainings;
12414
5/    
. .   - 
6/ Promote existing investment opportunities by
preparing materials on same, and provide, upon
request, link-up services for participants of joint
7/ Make industrial parks promotion one of its core
undertakings within the national investment
promotion work;
8/ Establish as a core agency a cost-effective system
for and to provide a coordinated, accessible and
accurate information to investors and other
concerned bodies with the purpose of promoting
investment opportunities in government-owned
industrial parks and attracting and recruiting
9/ Negotiate and sign bilateral investment promotion
and protection treaties with countries that can be
sources = of outward = foreign investment in
accordance with the procedure under the applicable
law on international treaty making and ratification;
10/ Cause the establishment of an information
exchange system that enables current and
accurate information flow between the
Commission, investors and other government
agencies;
11/ Facilitate liaison and effect coordination between
investors, government agencies, regions and
other organs concerned with investment with a
view to enhancing investment;
12415
.  -
TE      
/ -    
12/ Collect, compile, update, analyze and disseminate
any investment-related information;
13/ Issue, renew and cancel investment permits within
its jurisdiction and register capital brought into
the country by foreign investors;
14/ Register technology transfer agreements related
to investments;
15/ Register a collaboration agreement for export
trade without capital contribution between a
domestic investor and foreign enterprise;
16/ Monitor the progress and implementation of
investment projects for which it has issued
permits; ensure that the terms of the investment
permit are complied with, that incentives granted
to investors are used for the intended purposes,
and that national investment objectives are met;
17/ Provide and coordinate one-stop services;
18/ Carry out post-investment support and monitoring
services in collaboration with bodies established
for the purpose;
19/ Extend advisory and technical support services to
strengthen appropriate investment organs of
Regions, and organize joint consultation forums;
20/ Raise investors awareness on the contents of this
Proclamation as well as Regulations and
Directives issued hereunder;
12416
8.  
HY   GE 
21/ Hold regular and structured public-private dialogue
with investors and their associations, cause
investment bottlenecks to be resolved in
collaboration with appropriate Government
Organs;
22/ Implement directives and decisions of the Board,
and follow up their implementation by other
relevant bodies;
23/ Own property, enter into contract, and sue and be
sued in its own name;
24/ Carry out other functions pertinent for proper
implementation of its objectives;
25/ Carry out the functions entrusted to it herein in
coordination with other Federal Government and
Regional State Administration Bodies.
39. Organization of the Commission
The Commission shall have:
1/ A Commissioner and Deputy Commissioners to be
appointed by the Prime Minister; and
2/ The necessary staff.
40. Powers and Duties of the Commissioner
The Commissioner shall:
1/ Be the Chief Executive Officer of the Commission
and shall, subject to general instructions given by
the Board, direct and administer activities of the
Commission;
2/ Exercise Powers and Duties of the Commission
specified under Article 38 of this Proclamation;
12417
5/    AG  
G5 .    
3/ Employ, administer, and dismiss employees of the
Commission in accordance with the Federal Civil
Servants' Law;
4/ Determine conditions of institutional capacity
building agreements concluded with various
development partners and pertinent stakeholders;
5/ Adopt Directives regulating matters falling within
the scope of its Powers and required for the
this and
implementation 0 Proclamation
Regulations adopted hereunder;
6/ Prepare and submit work program and budget of the
Commission to Office of the Prime Minister, and
implement the same upon approval;
7/ Effect payments in accordance with the approved
budget and work program of the Commission;
8/ Represent the Commission in its dealings with third
parties;
9/ Prepare and submit performance and financial
reports of the Commission to Office of the Prime
Minister;
10/ Delegate part of his powers and duties to other
officers and staff of the Commission as necessary
for the efficient performance of the Commissions
activities.
41. Powers and Duties of the Deputy Commissioner
1/ The Deputy Commissioner shall:
a) Assist the Commissioner in the directing,
administering and organizing the functions of the
b) Oversee parts of the Commission's departments by
assigning functions in accordance with the
structure of the Commission;
12418
&/      
/     - 
) Act on behalf of the Commissioner in his absence;
d) Perform such other duties as may be specifically
entrusted to him by the Commissioner.
2/ The Deputy Commissioner shall be accountable to the
Commissioner.
42. Budget
The Commissions budget shall be allocated by the
Government.
43. Books of Account
1/ The Commission shall keep complete and accurate
books of account.
2/ The books of account and financial documents of the
Commission shall be audited annually by the Federal
Auditor General or another Auditor designated by the
Federal Auditor General.
44 Establishment of the Federal Government and
Regional State Administrations Investment Council
and coordinated
A Council for the cooperative
administration of investment between the
Government and Regional State Administrations is
established by this Proclamation.
45. Powers and Duties of the Council
The Council shall:
1/ Direct and oversee all aspects of the horizontal
relationship and coordination between the Federal
Government and Regional State Administrations
on matters relating to investment administration
with the objective of establishing simplified and
synchronized investment system;
12419
-  
5%.  
/   - AT 
 ...................... ------ 
2/ Deliberate and decide on or put forth a
recommended solution for all matters ensuing
pertaining to the exercise of powers and functions
of the Federal Government and Regional State
Administrations involving investment
administration, and ensure that such decisions or
recommended solutions are conveyed to the
relevant institution and complied with;
3/ Establish an oversight system that enables
evaluation of workflow between the Federal
in respect of implementation of investment
services; put into action a system to prevent and
resolve hindrances to the provision of investment
services:
4/ Render decisions or put forth recommended
solutions on fundamental grievances or
significant misunderstandings submitted 
investors regarding the provision of pre-
investment and post-investment services,
including the allocation of land, by regional state
investment administration bodies with respect to
investments effected under this Proclamation.
46. Members of the Council
The Council shall have the following members:
1/ The Prime Minister, or in his absence, the Deputy
9: ]606............................. Chairperson;
2/ Presidents of all Regions and Mayors of the Addis
Ababa City Administration and Dire Dawa City
Administration................ co veo vi iene. Members;
12420
. - 
a)
IN)
/     ANAT 
 - 
9%.   
3/ The Commissioner, heads of the appropriate
investment organs of all Regions and Addis Ababa
and Dire
City Administration Dawa City
Administration............. cooei iii. Members:
4/ Other members designated by the Prime Minister as
necessary.
47. Meetings of the Council
1/The Council shall meet once every six months but
may meet additionally where it is deemed
necessary or a matter requiring immediate attention
arises.
members of the Council are present at any
meeting.
3/ In relation to matters submitted to it, the Council
shall pass decisions or adopt recommended
solutions based on evidence and informed
discussions.
4/ Any Federal Government or Regional State
Administration body shall execute the decisions or
recommended solutions of the Council.
48. Secretariat
The Office of the Prime Minister shall serve as
Secretariat of the Council.
49. Institutional Working of the Council
The Board shall adopt a Directive determining the
the rendering of decisions or recommended solutions.
12421
#.    
 - . 
nS)
0
50. Coordination with Regional State Investment
Administration Organs
1/The Commission shall work in close cooperation
with Regional State Investment Administration
Organs and other Stakeholders with a view to
creating a uniform, coordinated and efficient
national investment administration system.
2/ For such purposes, the Commission shall engage
with appropriate investment organs of Regions to
jointly develop a
comprehensive guideline
regulating all aspects of mutual work relationships.
3/ Standing Regional State Investment Desks shall be
established within the functional structures of the
Commission which shall work on co-promoting
concrete investment opportunities of regions,
coordinate common administrative works and
augment the Regions participation in investment
administration; they shall also facilitate the efficient
provision of pre- and post-investment services and
resolve investment bottlenecks encountered by
issued investment
investors permits by the
51. Procedures Followed with Respect to the
Provision of Investment Land
1/ In pursuance of Powers granted to them under the
pertinent Federal Land Administration Laws,
Regions shall handle land requests for investments
in the manufacturing, agriculture, and other sectors
in an efficient manner, and shall establish a
transparent and predictable system for the handling
of such requests.
12422
    AS
 ()    
   (3)   
Gf. -  
  AT  
  . -
2/ Regions shall identify and classify land to be used
for investment projects, organize such land
centrally under one Regional State Administration
body and
transfer the information to the
appropriate investment organs.
3/ With respect to land provision requests submitted to
Regional State Bodies in respect of an investment
undertaken based on an investment permit issued
pursuant to this Proclamation, the Commission
shall coordinate with Regional State
Administrations and appropriate investment organs
to facilitate and follow through the efficient
handling of such requests.
4/ Regions may establish a Special Procedure
requiring the pertinent Regional State Body to
respond to land allocation request made by an
investor holding investment permit issued under
this Proclamation within sixty (60) days where the
investment is in the manufacturing sectors, and
within Ninety (90) days where the investment is in
other sectors.
52. Provision of Investment-Related Information
1/Concerned Federal Government and Regional State
Administration Bodies shall transfer information
regarding land allocated for various investment
projects, land use profile, and other relevant,
complete and updated investment-related
information to the Commission in order to enable
the Commission discharge its Powers and Duties
12423
     AS
-       
!
=)
i]
2/ The appropriate investment organ of each Region
shall transmit to the Commission updated
information on resource potentials, investment
opportunities and investment activities conducted
in the Region.
PART NINE
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
53. Industrial Parks
Unless otherwise indicated in this Proclamation, other
relevant Investment Laws concerning Industrial Parks
shall remain in force.
54. Duty to Observe Other Laws and Social and
Environmental Sustainability Values
1/ All investors shall carry out their investment
activities in compliance with the Laws of the
country.
2/ All investors shall give due regard to social and
environmental sustainability values including
environmental protection standards and social
carrying out their
inclusion objectives 
investment projects.
55. Power to Issue Regulation and Directive
1/ The Council of Ministers shall issue regulations
necessary for the implementation of this
2/ The Board, the Commission, the Ethiopian Civil
Aviation Authority, the Energy Authority, and the
Ethiopian Communications Authority may issue
Directives for the implementation of Regulations
enacted pursuant to this Proclamation.
12424
      8  ELIE . Federal Negarit Gazette No.28 April 27" 2020 ...... page
9%.      56. Repealed and Inapplicable Laws
8/   5/ 1/ The Investment Proclamation No.769/2012 (as
()    amended) and the Ethiopian Investment Board
     and Ethiopian Investment Commission
      Establishment Council of Ministers Regulation
 /    No. 313/2014 are hereby repealed.
/      / 2/ The Rights and Obligations of the Ethiopian
    Investment Commission established  Council
      of Ministers Regulation No. 313/2014 are
    transferred to the Commission reestablished by
 this Proclamation.
/       3/ No law or customary practice shall have effect
      with respect to matters provided for in this law so
   as it is inconsistent with this Proclamation.
95.  
   #8   
  . 
28/#8 ()   
57.
Transitory Provision
Notwithstanding the Provisions of Article 56 of this
Proclamation, Rights and entitlements bestowed
pursuant to Investment Proclamation No.769/2012 (as
amended) and Regulations and Directives issued there
under shall remain applicable in respect of
investments approved prior to the coming into force of
this Proclamation.
12425
#.   
      .
58. Effective Date
This Proclamation shall enter into force on the date of
publication in the Federal Negarit Gazettee.
Done at Addis Ababa, On the 2" Day of April 2020.
SHALEWORK ZEWDE
PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA