For Ethiopian Industrial Parks
Table of contents

Executive summary. 7
Introduction 9
T. INAUSErAliSation IN ELNIOPIA. coerce eeeciereeteeirecieneeretee scence ce ereseenee sa eneneesesesaseesesensenesssensescss san seseneesescnances 9
2. Working conditions iN the FACIOMY cuca ee eae senesaese sentences senses eae saneeseneesencnce 9
3. The role of HUMAN RESOUICES....... c. cviiiiiiiiiiiiccicecietcieenceeseas eset cases cases asses cases asses sas ssn sasacasasasasasace 10
4. HUmMan ReSOUICES GUIAEINES ..... coviuiiiiiiiiiiiiiice cities cases cases cas sea assesses sen sas scasasssn casas 10
Chapter 1: The HR policy manual 12
1. The importance of an HR MANUAL... cise seit ses st seassseanes sens snanas 12
2. HR policy and procedures: the @ssentials.......... ccciiiiiicieciceciceci cence ceca cscs 13
3. WIItING the HR MANUAL ceive eeececeieececacaieesen ea ane ses canancscsenm ene sensnsesssessasessssescscasasece 15
3.1. Structure of POlICIES ANT PrOCEAUIES ..... coueeerieuiireriecireceeneeieseteeeiene tenes se enese sae serasesseseassaessncssencas sen sescre ses 15
3.2. SEYIE ANA IANZUAZE ceveveiveiecereeceecercetetce sce seetneeae sea teeeae sees seatsa sae sen ses ess sen sesese san sesanessscntsaessncnseneassensescae ses 15
3.3. LEEAI SPECS cueiviieeereceineeieceteecetneeuencae ea enee ete senaeese esas seae nesses cas samsenent eae st sen sesert sae sesaneesentateaesscnseneat sen sesereeee 15
4. Communicating the HR Policies and ProCEAUIES .......... couvivuirieinirinieiciciiciciicecteeene ete enen snes eneneasnns 16
AT. THAININEG covert et cece encase cece eae sae sae teat saeansn ee cae ene suesasmeeneenssasasataseasensonass ernest ens easnencssenneneenesaeneene 16
5. Review: HR manual as a lIVing dOCUMENT ...... cc. civiiniiniiiiiriiccinc cists sansa nc seanssnanas 18
5.1. REVIEW rIEEOIS ceric cece ete cea ents cee cat eae ca ee coe eae sa sae sa ea season tence catent sus samesncssensenanconeneenssueannce 18
5.2. TYPES OF CANZES cevvceieeiecreecencietcteece see eaeseuaneese sen teaeaeseeseseateaeassensesess sen sesess san sesanesssscsssasssncsseacssncnsescassasses 18
5.3. THE MEVIEW PIOCESSES.. c. ueeucerereueeerereeeeierennercacmeneesenenseaesssessescsseaessntsseness sen sesesssaseseneesestsssasssncssesssencasescsssasses 18
6. Daily communication and implementation of the policies....... ccouvrvircniriniviciniviccccciicccceae 19
Chapter 2: Recruitment and selection 20
To PANNING cette cece cee eect eae seaese es eoe saa e assesses eas senses eae sassesensesess san sesenessssesanesssncrssaessncnseserssassssene 20
2 DEVEIOPING @ STFATEEY we cveveveneerereueneiercreeeneneiereeitneeseseeteeesenensesenseaesssessescas sen sesese ss sesanessesenssaesescasescsssensescssees 21
3 SOUFCINE wevvrirceeeae cuenta eeesaeeeeaeeneeaesae ace enneneeeeentene sre saeneeseanessenassceseasensostescasent sss sesnencsnensenaescosentenssueseence 21
4 SCPEENINE cerita cee eteee cect sce eae eae cae sa ce seasenees ee sea eae sae sae ee ea sensenarecesensensos es catent su sasmesncsnensenaescoseneenssuseence 23
Be SEIECHION wits saa aa sea sea sea seat seat sea tt sea st sea nt srnne 24
6 [@aTa a] 8 [VT a TT r= 1 (To 0 OOP 25
7 [DLaTa1U fg aT=T a= 1 To OOO 25
8. AfLer RECIUITING: RELENTION cei tetce sete cess ea teneae san en eae sa esane ese seneessesensencssncnsencas sees 26
ANNEX I: STAff REQUISITION FOIMM. cuiiiieieeieriiercreceneicierccenneenesenteaceesen sence saeaescssesess sen seseseesesesasessencsnsassencnsescsssessesene 27
Annex Il: Detailed Procedures for Internal and External RECrUMENT ..... c. vovvevreeerierreeireiercrrerreee sents sesseenenees
Annex Ill: Employment of relatives (optional BUIAEIINE) .... cccueeoveerereenrerenrcre cere seiencerescteeeeesenereesenenene
Chapter 3: Employee onboarding
1. The benefits of onboarding.........
2. The onboarding plan..............
2.1. Target audience ..... ceeevcvecenene
2.2. Onboarding Content ....... cccccceeeuee
3. Onboarding delivery method......
4. Onboarding review......... cccceeceeeee.
Annex I: Onboarding Checklist Template for NEW hilS ...... c. cccvrieerenrrerenrcre eee seiencereseneeeesenereesesenene
Annex Il: Onboarding Feedback templ
Chapter 4: Training and development
ate for new hires (general training) . c. cocoeeeeeeveeercerererneeerceneecrencnenene
1. The benefits of training........ c.......
2. The challenge of training .............
3. Analysing training needs: the training Needs ASSESSMENT .... c.. civrruerererrerereereserenerrecmneesescseneaeseseseeces
3.1. What to asSesS?.... vrverrecvervrrenrenns
3.2. HOW tO CONAUCE ThE ASSESSMENT? c. uvueieieereereeeieiranententetsnentesastessasssestestessasensessesessesssnsssensesssssssensesansessens
3.3. When tO CONAUCE ThE ASSESSMENT? .. uvuiiriereerieiernenteriesreesestesistessasssesteseessasessessssessesssnsssessessssssnensesassessens
3.4. What to do with the results of the ASSESSMENT? assesses seen es enneanans
4. Developing training capacities in
5. Conducting training..... cceceeeececeuene
5.1. Suggested Training Topics...........
Chapter 5: Performance management
TNE FACLONY caer seatse cesses cae saneee
1. The importance of Performance
 1 COP
2. The Strategic Role of HR in Performance Management ..... c.. ccceeeueeeerererereeeeereneerecemneeresceneeceencsnescesases
3. The Performance ManagemMENT PrOCESS ...... cccureecrmrecrencruecrmeeeeencesescesesseseseesesesesessescsssaessncsencsssensescseses
3.1. Stage 1: Factory Goals and Plann
TNE cv eetcececetennereeeceene eae en cnet eae sae sa ea eanen nena cae ene sue ease season nenan cae eatenesuenernce
3.2. Stage 2: Individual Performance Plan .... c. c. coco rencontre sen enceeaesereneesesennsaesescssencss sen sescse ees
3.2.1. Developing the Individual Management Plan ........ ccoeeeveenerrenenenseeeneeneeieneenescneeeeescsnencsesesenens
3.3. Stage 3: Managing and Coaching
3.4. Stage 4: Performance Appraisals
3.5. Stage 5: Performance INTEIVENTIONS. ccc irrecineceneeieseteeeene sence se esese sa senesessesennsaesencssencss sen sescse ses 61
4. Performance DOCUMENTATION ... c. ccviiiiiiiiriiiiiiiieci cect cases cases assesses asses sas ses sas scn sas sn casas 62
5. Implementation and enforcement of Performance Management......... ccoceceeeencrnerercrnneccncnnercseeennns 63
Annex I: Performance Planning and REVIEW FOIMN .... cccvereerieeoencruereneeeeencnierere se ereeeneserescesencsnsacsencsesesesessesene 65
Annex II: Individual Development Plan FOMMN .... c. c i rincenereeneeeeneiercre se eseeenesesescesencsssassencsescsesessesene 69
ANNEX IH: PEITOIMANCE LOE .. ceeivveieceierieneiercececesaeeneseetseenescaneaceesenseeaseacasscssesess sen sesesessescsaneesencsssassencnsesesesessssene 70
ANNEX IV: SEI-APPrAISAl FOIMN weve cee ccitnecneseeteeeee senses ce teeeae senses cae san essences sesaessencsssassencnsescsssessssene 71
Chapter 6: Compensation 72
1. The central role Of COMPENSATION .. cceviirirreiireriecintceeeieetntee settee ence ea eneseesesenanessesenssaesesessesesesassssene 72
2. Setting UP a COMPETITIVE SAlAIY coco cesar cece eneae ca enene ese senanassssenseacssncnsencas sees 73
2.1. Stage 1- Job analysis and ZradiNg ...... ccocccoeeerreeriecereneecieeeieneneree se enee sas esesessesesssassescsseacssncnescss senses 75
2.2. Stage 2 - Setting a COMPELItiVE SAlANY SCAIE. ccc ceeeeseetseeee sense cesses cae saneee 75
2.3. Stage 3: Salary administration based on the Labour Proclamation ......... cccceeercnerenceeecncnceercneeennns 76
3. WOIKErs BENEFITS cocoate assassin 77
A. INCENTIVE SCREIMES ceiver etctcasset aesesases cases ase s asses cases sas ss basses cas casasasasasae 78
ZO TO {= qT T= Ya TPP 79
4.2. Performance DOMUS...... cciiiiiiiiriciiiciceci etc etctet en cassen cases cases assassin essa sass asses sas snsasasasasas 79
4.2.1. Step 1: Identifying JOD familiES. ccc. tseeae sea tea cae sensencaesaeee 79
4.2.2. Step 2: Designing a performance incentive framework ......... ccocvcevcererecnneeenceneecenceencsceeenes 80
5. Communication of salary and BENET ...... c riences erect seetseeee sea see cee sen sence saneee 81
Annex I: Setting up the performance INCENTIVE. c. c... co rrr tetera ence ete senacesesenasaesenensesesesessesene 83
Chapter 7: Leave management. 86
1. The Importance of Leave ManagemIENT... ccc rrrerruerereneerenerereeneiereesaseeneseesesesasessescsssaesescsesesesassssene 86
2. TYPES OF LEAVE. .. coieiciieeiecietce neice eece ete seneneese sense senasessesenteaesssesseness sen sesest san seseneessstasaasssncsseasssncnsescassasee 86
3. Unauthorised Leave
4. ENfOrCiNG the 1AVE POICY w. eerierviiiierceeeeiceercesereeeecteecienee ies ce sa esensencae san sesese sa sesenessescnssaessncnseness sen sescse ses 90
Annex I: Leave Request and AULhOFZAtioN FOMM.... cue iineorniercneecencierce se enceenesenancesesesnsaesencsescsesessenene 91
Annex II: Leave without Pay Request and AUthOriSAtion FOIM c... cc. covoieeoerruerenenneecneerecencerecneeeencnercesennenene 92
ANNEX IH: TYPES OF IQAVE.... cevvceiteiecietcesce settee eee seetneeseseatea ce aseese ses teaeasses ses css sen sesese sae sesanessencsssassencnsesesesesssnene 93
Annex IV: Leave SUMMArY FOrMAt..... oiiiniiiiiiiiniicic iii nieans sacs ct en teasers sas sas saesss ass sonnsssessnsssosns 95
Chapter 8: Grievance procedure 92%
1. How to establish effective grievance handling SYSTEMS ..... ccceoevevioinrercrenneicreeresceneeiescnneeeseneneesasenene 97
2. WHISEIE DIOWING cc. coiiiiiieriecietcencecirtcei cece settee tee cease ese sen tee eae sea sen eae senesese sen sesane ss senssasssnesseacssncnsescassaeee 98
3. Developing a grievance MECHANISM. .... c vr rrecirectneerescteeeesesenese se ieseseseseresessesesssaesencsseneas sen sescse ses 99
4. Beyond grievances: towards improved communication and practises ...... cceeeeeercrreeerercevercreaeeenene
ANNEX I: EMPIOYEE GIEVANCE FOMN. ciiioirierirteiieiencereeeaeucneeneeeaese eset sa aesensesesesesseseseesesesaseesencnseasssncsesese senses
ANNEX 11: GIIEVANCE LOG .. eiivirieicit iene ctetetccce ene eteseesceeane see scesensenseseecaeens one sasenncanensenesscsencenssueneencencnennen
Chapter 9: Disciplinary procedure
1. Development and enforcement of disciplinary pProCeaUIE ........ ceeeeeeceeeeerereerereeneeeerceneecencerceeeene
Types of diSCIPINAIY SANCHIONS ... covvieriviriercreerecieeercreereeeieseneree sa eree ease sen sence en sereessecsssaesencasescsescssenen
Best practices for an effective disciplinary procedure... eceeeneenceecreeecinceeecneeeenee ence senenene
A won
Code of conduct aNd WOIK ThiICS .... cuviiiiiiiiriiiciicccccc ccc sn eae sn en snns
5. Basic principles Of WOIK ETNICS ccc coerce cect etree ence cee eaee sae senasecae senses cas sensesese see
5.1. Equal employment OPPOITUNITY cocoeteueeereereeeineereeerecetnceterese sen enese en seeanseneseeessesaessescnsseesencssesesssensesese see
5.2. Anti- Harassment and VIOIENCE....... cc. coiiiiiiiriciict ceteris cease sass ssa assesses scn casas
5.30 ANTi- COMTUPTION weitere cette eter cece eae cree cece sae sae ae sea eaten ae cae eae sae eases ses sensenasnaneeneenesueence
LTE 0a 11Te ToT PN
5.5. Occupational Health and Safely ..... ccco veri cece ete ence ete eieesaeseatsecae senses ese sensesese cee
LTT a Toto NF-Y oT TU PN
Annex I: Guidelines for the classification of offences and progressive disciplinary sanctions .................
ANNEX 1: DISCIPINAIY LOZ ecvevuceieeeieciereeneniercteeeeueneereeeaneeuesceseaesaseesesessescsssensesesssaseseseesesesaseesencsseasssncsescsesasses
Chapter 10: Employee movement
Te TI ANSTO eet eects see easa esses encasement ea eae samen eae sans ane sa sea aea essen tea eae sen sen eae sen es
2. PIOMOTION citric eect teeter sae sae ea season een coe cae eaten eect eat eae saa ea eaten aes ee eae eae sae sernee
Bi DEMOTION cetera eats esas ae cece ea sae sa ea eae sa sae ea eaten ence eat sae saa ea en nen een aeeacene
A. TEIMINATION weitere cece cect eee sate cae eae sae sae ea sen sen aes ae sea sensen ass canent ens sasneencasensenasnasseneene
ANNEX 1: HANAOVEN NOTE.... ciiiieiieiecierceeeiectete erect eetseeae see seaeeaseese ses sencas sen sesesssasesesessesesaseesencnsensssncnsesese senses
ANNEX 112 EXIT INTEIVIEW FOIMN cei eteteee cece tenet coe eae eae sae sae sea en sen an cae cacens saseacanennennen
Chapter 11: Communication
1. Internal COMMUNICATION ... coviiiiiiieii ricci sea st etatstaetstsst sass sass sas ss saa st seasssnsnesenanes
1.1. Setting up effective internal COMMUNICAtION STIUCTUIES .. c.. cveueeeiererereriercreeecrencereseeeneeneseeneecaenensencae sana
1.1.1. COMMUNICATION CHANNELS ..... ciiiiiiciiirictc ccc st sae sn sas enns
1.1.2. Meetings and ENZAZEMENT SESSIONS c... cuevurrreruemrrrereenerecneeeresesesesesasseseseesescsasessencaseacssscesesess senses
1.1.3. WOIKErs PArtiCIPATION w. ceveucecierceeeieice cere ceeteceteecie settee sen es coten cae sanseneae sa sesanesseenssaesencasencassesenens
1.1.4. COMMUNICATION SKIllS... cvuiiiiiieiiciicriii circa ets sne essa en sas enns
2. DULY OF CAME cuits ca eect ete seaaneese estes esas es eae sam es eae sae sesensenest san sesanesssnensasessncsseseassensesese see
3. Stakeholder MANAGEMENT . ccc irre eeeeicrceecreceerecetetee seers sae sesseneae sen eesese sae senasessencnsaasssnensescrssassesens
1.2. Steps of Stakeholder MANAGEMENT .. c. ccoii reece teresa erce ca ereeeseseaanaese sen seaeaenenseseaesaneee
1.3. Useful principles for stakeholder ENgagemeEnT...... cceveveeeeerenrsenneecre cece scenes neeceene ence sees 133
2. CONTIICE MANAGEMENT. courrier ceerciercaeetneereenteeeaesen sen eateaeassesseseas sen sesesessssesanessentnsesessncssesesssensesese ees 134
2.1. Principles of effective CONFlICt re@SOIUTION .... cvuveviuecieececetcetcecerce seer cee seaeeece sean cae senaencae een 134
2.2. Types of CONFlICt iN the WOTIKDIACE ecco etc se ence ete eiaessesenese eae sen ses cae sen sesese eee 135
2.3. CONIC PrEVENTION courtier reer cece seen eeaneeseseateacae sense esteaeae nesses ess sansenese sa scsanessenensasessncssesesssensesese ses 135
2.4. Mediation iN the fACTONY. covert ceteris ce sees en cae samen eae ea sename sae sesasassenessesesssensesese een 137
ANNEX I: Meeting MINULES TEMIPIATE. c... civierctereieertecet eect senor cae saeneneneae seas ances seranessenenseacssscnsescse sense 138
Annex II: Typical emergency telEPNONE THEE co. cc secre caer eet seeaseesesenneaeae sen sesese eases 139
Chapter 12: The Way forward - HR Guidelines implementation 141
To THE ChECKIIST circa sea stata sta st stas tsa st sas st sas stsaassseasssnsneseranas 141
2. ThE HR SCOMECANT cout cases cease assassin asses asses sas cs sas ss sas scnsasacasasae 144
2.7. What 0 MEASUIE? cuit cites en ca et caesar staat sca as scat sca asses sacs sas sss sas asa sasacssasacssasacs 144
2.2. Setting up Targets and Checking PerfOrManCe ...... c cc verrneecreereneneneecreeeeeieneeneseanseeenessesese sen sesescees 145
2.3. How to implement the HR SCOMECAIT? ..... cvireeeerreienciecieeceneieree se enceeneenaessesenssecsencssescss sen sesese ses 145
2.4. HR scorecard for factories in Ethiopian IPS ........ ccoiiieereeenencriercnenenencreeneereneenesenneeesencssescscsesesese ees 146
Annex 1: Centralised Services in Industrial Parks 148
About the Ethiopian Investment Commission E I (
ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
The Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) is an autonomous government institution
accountable to the countrys Investment Board, which is chaired by the Prime Minister. A
Commissioner, who is also member of the Board, heads the EIC.
The main services provided by EIC include:
Promoting the countrys investment opportunities and conditions to foreign and
domestic investors;
Issuing investment permits, business licenses and construction permits;
Notarizing memorandum and articles of association and amendments;
Issuing commercial registration certificates as well as renewals, amendments,
replacements or cancellations;
Effecting registration of trade or firm name and amendment, as well as replacements or
cancellations;
Issuing work permits, including renewals, replacements, suspensions or cancellations;
Grading first grade construction contractors;
Registering technology transfer agreements and export-oriented non-equity-based
foreign enterprise collaborations with domestic investors;
Negotiating and, upon government approval, signing bilateral investment promotion
and protection treaties with other countries; and
Advising the government on policy measures needed to create an attractive investment
climate for investors.
In addition, the EIC provides the following free, confidential and customized services to
investors:
Provision, through our website, various publications, or through direct response to
investor's inquiries, of information on sector-specific business opportunities, business
incorporation procedures and related regulations, employment regulations.
Hand-holding and supporting the investor during the acquisition of land and utilities
(water, electrical power and telecom services); the processing of loans and residence
permit applications; the approval of environmental impact assessments studies for
investment projects; and the issuance of a tax identification number (TIN).
ZN IN
ukaid ENTERPRISE PARTNERS
from the British people
About Enterprise Partners
Enterprise Partners is the leading part of the U. K. Department for International Development's
flagship Private Enterprise Programme Ethiopia. Enterprise Partners supports agro-industrial
development and access to finance. The initiative creates job and incomes for the poor, with a
focus on women. The goal is to create 45,000 jobs {75% female) and increase incomes for 65,000
poor households.
Enterprise Partners works through two major pillars:
e Agro-Industry: Strengthening market systems in three of the government priority sectors
- garments, leather and horticulture.
e Finance and Investment: Strengthening financial systems for increased investments for
small, medium, and large enterprises as well as promoting private equity and foreign
direct investment
About Sustainability Agents SUSA GmbH 9-1
Sustainability Agents
Sustainability Agents SUSA GmbH provides consultancy and training services for the improved
implementation of social, labour and environmental standards at production sites from a wide
range of industries worldwide. With more than 15 years of experience, SUSA has provided
services to more than 700 factories from diverse industries - including electronics, garment,
retail, furniture, jewellery, toys and leather goods - in Turkey, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh,
Ethiopia, Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, China, Germany, Czech Republic, Georgia,
Romania and Bulgaria.
Our two-pronged approach drives change through a combination of top-down and bottom-up
strategies:
 We work with companies to integrate sustainability into their procurement process.
We provide trainings at supplier factories to empower workers and managers to solve
problems jointly, generating sustainable improvements at the workplace.
About R&D Entrepreneurship & Outsourcing  RDcrour
Centre INNOVATE YOUR BUSINESS
Daughter Company of the Dutch based consultancy firm RBD Consultancy, R&D
Entrepreneurship & Outsourcing Centre is a private limited company set up under the Ethiopian
commercial law. The organization aims to assist organizations increase their efficiency and
business performance through providing management trainings, HR consultancy, and
recruitment services.
At R&D we aim to stimulate the creation of socially responsible business and help organizations
in Africa, specifically in Ethiopia grow strategically. We provide our customers with a complete
full scale, cost effective and efficient business solutions tailored to their specific needs. R&D has
completed many HRD projects for major multinationals, developmental organizations and the
government. With nearly 105 employees, R&D provides cutting-edge business solutions to
companies geared to improve their efficiency and business performance, working with local
experts and wide range of networks in international market.
Project Team
Sustainability Agents SUSA
Sebastian Siegele, Carolina Galiotti
GmbH
R&D Entrepreneurship & Wondwesen Zewdie, Nebat Abbas
Outsourcing Centre Mukemil Bedru, Aklilu Abate
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Executive summary
Executive summary
The Ethiopian government has introduced the establishment of industrial parks to promote foreign
direct investment with the target to create jobs and promote export, as an integral part of the 2nd
growth and transformation plan (GTP II).
As in other countries that have undergone a fast industrialisation process, the development of the
manufacturing industry in the country is facing a series of challenges, among them, the need to
develop a skilled, highly motivated workforce that leads to high productivity rates. Most of these
challenges are the natural consequence of a rapid introduction of manufacturing to a traditionally
agricultural economy. However, the HR management practices of factories play a big role in
facilitating this transition.
These guidelines have been commissioned by the Ethiopian Investment Commission and
Enterprise Partners to R&D Group and Sustainability Agents SUSA GmbH to help factories in
Ethiopian industrial parks deal with their most pressing HR challenges effectively. The guidelines
are based on the Ethiopian labour proclamation, international best practices and provides
contextual recommendations for the management of the workforce.
Factories are encouraged and guided to develop effective HR structures and policies in order to:
e Achieve high levels of retention, motivation and productivity
e Comply with country laws and industry standards
eo Prevent conflict, absenteeism and tardiness
e Enhance competitiveness and meet the expectations of international clients
e Create a positive image of the factories and IPs among the community
The HR Guidelines include legal requirements, international standards, instructions and
recommendations developed for key areas of the HR function, including:
e Developing and enforcing of an HR manual that establishes a uniform system to
manage all HR matters
e Setting up a fair, transparent, ethical and effective recruitment and selection practice that
allows to find and hire the best candidates aligned to production needs
e Establishing a complete onboarding programme that properly integrates employees to
their new role and work environment, sets up clear expectations and responsibilities
and, in cases of new hires from rural areas, also helps them transition to their new
living conditions
e Settling a comprehensive training program for all staff that allows the appropriate
development of the workforce in both technical and soft skills
e Creating a performance-based culture that helps factories to align employees and
resources with their strategic objectives
e Setting up adequate and competitive compensation schemes -including wages,
allowances, bonuses and other benefits- taking a holistic approach to provide benefits
that considers workers living conditions and contributes to boost productivity.
+ Developing effective, legitimate, transparent and safe grievance handling procedures, to
address employee concerns before they lead to more serious employee relations
issues
e Creating and enforcing a clear, transparent, fair and well communicated disciplinary
procedure in the factory that guides supervisors and managers in the discipline of
employees promoting certainty and consistency in dealing with misconduct.
e Setting up strategies for internal and external communication to disseminate the right
information to all stakeholders including employees, governments, clients and the
overall community in which the IP is set
As most of the challenges the factories face are often shared by all factories in the industrial park,
a joint effort of tackling these challenges needs to be driven. Through centralized social services,
factories and stakeholders can be able to find an optimum way of delivering services whereby
worker satisfaction and community engagement is maintained with lower cost and energy.
Centralised social services and resources help the factories by:
 Increasing cost-effectiveness of social services, as joint efforts allow to provide
better quality services with lesser resources.
* Providing a level platform of minimum social services and standards, thereby
helping to avoid multiple and mismatching standards in industrial parks.
* Preventing social and labour standards from being entangled into the logic of
competition by restraining the use of different levels of social services between the
factories to poach workers.
+ Contributing to fostering social peace with the communities around the park, as
sharing a joint strategy to manage community relationships contributes to protecting
the reputation of the IP and of each factory.
e Preventing unrest with the workforce, as they receive standard social services that
improve their living conditions.
+ Enabling the factories to focus on their core business, production and quality, as
common needs and risks are addressed in a coordinated and effective manner, which
helps to significantly reduce the time and resources that each factory would require to
do so individually.
With common understanding among all stakeholders and an efficient monitoring and evaluation
system in place, services that can be centralized at a park level include: transport, medical services,
meals, subsidized shops, training, counselling, community engagement and stakeholder
management.
Centralized services bring benefits that exceed those achieved by factories working separately. It
is, therefore, highly encouraged that factories share knowledge and jointly address common
needs, work together towards joint solutions and develop new ways of offering better services to
their workers while saving costs. The better the whole IP performs, the more competitive
advantage it will have in attracting and retaining workforce and clients.
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Introduction
Introduction
1. Industrialisation in Ethiopia
Ethiopia is moving fast towards industrialisation. As part of its development strategy, the Ethiopian
government has actively promoted the development of labour-intensive industries by
implementing sector development plans, offering incentive schemes to foreign investors and
financing industrial parks across the country. This has made Ethiopia an attractive country for
different industries, and, in particular, apparel companies who face constant pressure to keep up
with competitive pricing worldwide.
Ethiopia's fast-paced industrialisation, however, has not come without its challenges. As in almost
every other country that has undergone a fast industrialisation process, the development of the
manufacturing industry in Ethiopia is facing a series of challenges, among them, the need to
develop a skilled, highly motivated workforce that leads to high productivity rates.
Most of these challenges are the natural consequence of a rapid introduction of manufacturing to
a traditionally agricultural economy. However, the HR management practices of factories play a big
role in facilitating this transition. The implementation of policies and procedures that are
comprehensive enough and adapted to the local culture and applicable legislation; the adequate
enforcement of the policies and procedures in place; the presence of a long-term vision and
practices for the training and development of the workforce; and a good documentation and
evaluation of practices, among others, can contribute to the development of well-functioning
working environments. Therefore, it has become increasingly clear that the role of HR in the
process of industrialisation is of utmost importance.
2. Working conditions in the factory
According to the International Labour Organization (ILO), working conditions are at the core of paid
work and employment relationships. They include a wide range of topics and issues, including
working time, remuneration, physical conditions and mental demands that exist in the workplace,
and, therefore, can have a great impact on the well-being of employees. In the area of workers
health, for example, not taking adequate measures to minimise the impact of occupational risks
such as injuries, noise, carcinogenic agents, airborne particles and ergonomic risks can lead to
chronic health problems in workers. According to the World Health Organization, occupational
risks account for 37% of all cases of back pain, 16% of hearing loss, and 13% of chronic obstructive
pulmonary diseases, among others.
Good working conditions are, therefore, important for ensuring the well-being of workers.
Companies, however, also profit from good labour practices. Studies by the ILO" show that
factories experience great improvements in productivity when workers feel satisfied with the
infrastructure, services provided by factories (canteen, restrooms, health services) and relationship
1 ILO (2015). Research Brief: Working Conditions, Productivity and Profitability Evidence from Better Work Vietnam.
with their employer. Moreover, the studies also found that these factories have a better position
in the supply chain and are likely to be the preferred supplier to their most important clients.
HR has a central role in guaranteeing that the working conditions at the factory lead to not only a
highly-compliant working environment that maximises human capital and the profitability of the
factories, but also, to a satisfied workforce.
3. The role of Human Resources
HR has an important and strategic role in labour-intensive industries. They are responsible for
managing people as well as business resources. They are involved not only in managing the most
important component of a successful factory -the workforce, but also in managing tasks related to
compliance, stakeholder management, general administration and safety.
Human resources departments can create value in factories in many different ways, such as:
developing and enforcing policies and procedures aligned with international standards and
national laws; enhancing communication in the factory; acquiring, developing and retaining talent;
creating a performance-based culture; and ensuring a highly compliant and motivating working
environment. However, due to the fast pace and high pressure in manufacturing industries, HR
departments of factories are often diverted from their main role and responsibilities as business
partners of the company and tend to focus on dealing with transactional issues and managing
crises. This document aims to provide some guidelines to help HR departments in the Ethiopian
manufacturing industry to successfully localise and implement effective HR solutions and, thereby,
tackle some of the most pressing issues that they can face.
These guidelines are based on the Ethiopian Labour proclamation 377/2003 and its
A amendments. In cases of revisions of enactments of a new labour Proclamation, factories
must align the guidelines with the new provisions.
4. Human Resources Guidelines
Enterprise Partners to R&D Group and Sustainability Agents SUSA GmbH. As mentioned above, the
guidelines are meant to help factories in industrial parks in Ethiopia to deal with their most
pressing HR challenges effectively. The guidelines are based on an assessment of the main
workforce-related issues affecting production performance and worker satisfaction in factories
that have either already started or are preparing to start production. They present HR
management solutions adapted to the labour proclamation, the local culture, and international
standards.
The focus of the guidelines is on solving practical issues in a comprehensive, realistic, culturally-
adapted and internationally-inspired way. The guidelines are divided into the following sections:
Chapter 1: The HR policy Manual
Chapter 2: Recruitment and selection
Chapter 6: Compensation
Chapter 7: Leave management
Chapter 8: Grievance procedure
Chapter 10: Employee Movement Promotion, Demotion, Termination
Chapter 12: The way forwards
Annex 1: Centralized Services in Industrial Parks
Useful tools are provided in each chapter to help factories address challenges effectively. The final
chapter of the guideline includes a checklist to monitor the implementation of the
recommendations provided and an HR Scorecard template with suggested KPIs to track the
performance of the HR departments.
The guideline also incorporates suggestions for factories in Industrial Park to work collaboratively,
centralizing services that would allow them to reduce costs and increase the impact of their
initiatives. This information can be found in Annex 1.
Regardless of what stage of HR development a factory is in, there is always a way to improve HR
processes and boost productivity and wellbeing in a factory. The guideline hopes, therefore, not
only to provide specific ideas to be applied and adapted to factories but also to inspire them to
start taking action. Starting is the hardest part but, as the saying goes, the start is half the battle.
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Chapter 1: The HR policy manual
Chapter 1: The HR policy manual
1. The importance of an HR manual
The HR policy and procedure manual (HR manual) is a vital document that establishes a uniform
system to manage all HR matters, detailing policies and procedures regarding employee
management and the relationship between managers and employees. Its development and
application allow organizations to:
e meet basic legal obligations
e make consistent and reliable decisions based on the company values and legal
requirements
e establish a clear understanding of expectations, rules and consequences
e reduce the chances of making mistakes and creating misunderstandings
 make the system more transparent and easier to work in, attracting more business and
more employees
e introduce employees to the business and their new job
The HR manual brings sustainable long-term benefits, since it will decrease arbitrary handling of
personnel matters, helping to reduce disputes or grievances.
Developing and improving an HR manual (if factories already have one} is also cost-effective.
Consider the amount of time employees spend asking questions about their rights and the existing
practices, policies and procedures, and how much time their supervisors/ managers spend finding
answers and solutions to those queries. This can be especially challenging in factories with
employees from different nationalities, who speak different languages and/or have different
cultural backgrounds. An HR manual contains all the necessary information on employee
management; allows employees to become aware of their rights and obligations; and, reduces
misunderstandings due to poorly defined working conditions.
However, the mere existence of an HR manual is not in itself a guarantee of good HR management.
Some common mistakes made by factories include:
e an HR manual consisting of a compilation of policies without internal coherence or policies
that are only developed for auditing purposes;
e to simply adopt HR manuals from other companies or countries;
e to simply have an HR manual on paper without proper enforcement.
This chapter provides the guidelines to be followed to develop or review HR manuals in Ethiopia's
IPs.
2. HR policy and procedures: the essentials
The HR manual includes all the policies and procedures relevant to the management of the
workforce. This section outlines the minimum content that should be present in an HR manual for
Ethiopian IPs.
The HR manual should introduce key information about the company, its objectives and
values, and the purpose of the manual. All policies and procedures should be aligned with
what is presented in this chapter, which sets ups up the basis for all the HR manual.
Information and rules on the daily work and the usage of the working space should be clear to
all employees, including:
o working time; work areas; security; dress code; phone usage; bathrooms and canteens;
waste bins; etc.
The HR manual should include the policies and regulations related to ethical principles and
compliance. These may include:
o obligations of the employer and employees (as stated in the Labour Law),
organization's code of conduct, equal employment opportunity, anti-harassment, anti-
corruption, conflict of interest, and all policies and regulations that relate to this topic.
The factories must have clear guidance on the strategy to attract and select staff that meets
the requirements of production. For more information refer to Chapter 2 of these guidelines.
A comprehensive onboarding process is crucial to properly introduce workers to their new role
and work environment, help them transition to their new living conditions and, thereby,
promote retention and workplace satisfaction. The on-boarding policy registers all steps that
managers and staff must follow during this process. For more information refer to Chapter 3 of
these guidelines.
All factories must provide formal training to their employees for them to be able to perform at
their positions effectively and safely. There are multiple benefits in developing and enforcing
ambitious training programs such as improvements in productivity, workforce satisfaction and
retention. The policy and procedures on training and career development should be included
in the HR manual. For more information refer to Chapter 4 of these guidelines.
To develop a working culture based on performance, the first step is to set up the performance
management mechanisms that will enable it. For more information refer to Chapter 5 of these
guidelines.
All employees of the factory should have a clear understanding about their salary composition
and its calculation. The policy should include the calculation of employees wages according to
clear scales that ensure transparency and fairness, information on pay dates, overtime, payroll
deductions, etc; as well as all benefits such as insurance, allowances and in-kind contributions.
For more information refer to Chapter 6 of these guidelines.
The different types of leave an employee can request and the procedures that must be
followed to do so should be clearly stated in the HR manual, including paid (annual leave, sick
leave, maternity leave and special leaves such as marriage, compassionate leave, union leaves,
etc. ) and unpaid leave. For more information refer to Chapter 7 of these guidelines.
HR departments should establish clear, simple and structured procedures that ensures the
detection, solution and communication of grievances in the factory. These procedures must
guarantee that employees are protected when sounding the alarm or expressing
dissatisfaction, and that grievances reported will be handled appropriately. For more
information refer to Chapter 8 of these guidelines.
A clear and well-communicated procedure that defines the disciplinary and corrective actions
in cases of employee misconduct must be developed to encourage work ethic and discipline. A
disciplinary procedure helps to prevent conflicts and misunderstandings, and needs to be
properly enforced at all levels without exceptions. For more information refer to Chapter 9 of
The HR manual should clearly state the procedures for all movement of staff including
promotion, demotion, transfer and termination. For more information refer to Chapter 10 of
The HR manual shall detail the Health and Safety Management System in place to provide and
maintain a safe working environment for employee. This includes the evaluation of safety
hazards, the provision of protective equipment and the delivery of training, along with any
measures necessary to prevent and/or correct conditions that endanger workers health, safety
and the environment.
The HR Department is responsible for keeping all employee data. The HR manual shall include
all procedures that guarantee that any and all information that affects/relates to an employee's
employment status (including promotions, transfers, absenteeism, training, performance
appraisals, letters of discipline, leave, etc) will be placed in their personal file, that the
information is accurate, that employees have access to their information and that the files will
be kept safe.
14
A
Whereas other policies can be included depending on the needs of each organization, it is
important to keep the focus on the policies that matter to the factories and the IP. Length
does not equal quality.
3. Writing the HR Manual
3.1.
Structure of policies and procedures
When it comes to writing the HR manual, it is important that the content of all policies follows the
same structure, such as:
3.2.
Policy name
Version number, effective date and approving authorities
Purpose of the policy (what it is intended to promote or achieve)
Main policy statement
Definitions of any key concepts or terms used in the policy
Eligibility or scope (what group(s) of employees are covered by the policy)
Procedure (if applicable): numbered, step-by-step instructions for carrying out the policy
Scope of permissible exceptions and who is responsible for making exceptions to the
general application of the policy (if applicable)
Positions in the organization responsible for implementing and monitoring the policy
Forms (if any)
Style and language
An HR manual should be written in a clear and consistent way, maintaining an overall coherence
and leaving some flexibility to adapt to new conditions.
3.3.
Keep it simple and concise: The HR manual should be prepared objectively and
comprehensively so that all the policies have consistency and share the same standards. It
is very important to keep the document free from excessive complexity or overlap to avoid
confusion.
Be consistent with your language: Terms should be used consistently, even when there
are multiple terms for the same process. Using synonyms, such as payment or
remuneration, interchangeably can lead to confusion.
Languages: The HR manual in Ethiopian IPs must be available in Amharic and the most
widely used language regionally. It is also useful for the factories to have their manuals in
English, as HR manuals are usually a requirement from clients.
Legal aspects
The HR Manual is a guide and not a contract with the employees. Although it guides HR interactions in
the factories, it should not tie the hands of the HR Department. Please follow the next steps to
ensure you comply with legal matters; that your HR manual facilitates, rather than impedes, HR
processes; and, to avert misunderstandings that could create legal problems.
Legal compliance: Before approval by either the HR manager, company CEO or board, all
policies and procedures must be reviewed to ensure compliance with the applicable
legislation, and should be consistent with the terms of any collective agreements. Legal
experts should be involved at this stage.
Leave room for flexibility: Although the policies should be comprehensive and leave no
room for confusion, they should also leave room for managers to flexibly respond to
individual situations. The manual should be more a set of guidelines rather than a strict
book of rules, especially as everyone will be expected to act in full compliance with the
manual.
Be realistic: A way to avoid ending up with an HR manual that is too prohibitive is to make
sure that its policies are pragmatic, reasonable and adapted to the organization.
Disclaimers: It is useful to include disclaimers that clearly state the scope and limits of the
HR manual and guarantee a certain level of flexibility for the management, such as:
o Limits of the HR manual: The policies in this HR manual do not constitute a contract
with any employee, supervisor or manager, or a contract guaranteeing any benefits or
agreeing to maintain any procedures or policies contained.
o Validity of policies: The policies in this manual supersede any previous policies
published on the matters they treat.
o Right to make changes: The company reserves the unlimited right to change or revise
the content of the manual, at any time, and in any lawful manner, without prior notice.
4. Communicating the HR Policies and Procedures
Once the HR manual is ready, it is time to communicate its policies and procedures with all
employees of the factory. There are several ways to do so.
4.1.
Training
Training on the policies and procedures should be a part of the onboarding process. Training is
an opportunity to discuss the policies with employees, clarify questions and give examples.
The HR department should be the first to be trained in all policies and procedures, and
have a good understanding of the labour law. Every staff member of the HR department
should master the HR manual. The HR manager should have the mandate to ensure that
all the staff from her/his department has an excellent knowledge of the manual. This
knowledge should be provided during the onboarding period of the HR staff.
The management sets the expectations and commitments to workplace practices. They
must have a good knowledge of the policies and procedures, in particular those relevant
to their scope and responsibilities.
The middle managers/ supervisors should be trained exhaustively on the policies and
procedures, as they are directly responsible for the operators. This knowledge needs to be
accompanied with enforcement strategies.
Operators need to be trained on the factory policies, what is expected from them and what
they can expect from the factory. This usually takes place during the on-boarding period.
The Employee Handbook
The employee handbook is a summary of the HR manual that includes policies and
procedures that are most relevant for the employees. While the HR manual is a reference
tool for managers and supervisors, the handbook is written with employees as the
intended audience.
The written communication of the policies allows the factory to document that the
employee was informed about the rules and that the expectations of them are clear.
In factories, as many workers have low educational levels, it should be particularly simple
and straightforward. Including illustrative pictures and graphics is highly recommended.
The Employee handbooks of factories in Ethiopia IPs must include
= The factory's history, mission, vision and goals
= The factory's core values and culture
The factory's policies, related to:
= General employment policies and practices
= Business ethics such as anti-discrimination and anti-harassment policy
= Discipline policy
= Health and safety policy
= Compensation policy
= Employee benefits policy
<= Work conditions and hours
= Attendance and leave of absence policy
= Work performance
= Employee benefits
Additionally, considering the novelty of IPs in Ethiopia and the percentage of workers who
arrive from other areas, the Employee Handbook should also include helpful information to
facilitate integration to the industry and the city, and to highlight their role in the countrys
industrialization and development process:
1. The Industry
= Basic information about the industry
= Industrialization in Ethiopia (benefits, role of workers in the country strategy)
2. The Industrial Park
= Basic information about the park
= (Centralized Services
3. (ity services and public organizations (incl. police, city council, health centres, etc. )
5. Review: HR manual as a living document
The HR policies must reflect changes in legislation and the environment. Therefore, it is important
that they are periodically revisited and updated to preserve their legality, relevance and efficiency.
5.1.
Review triggers
A review of the HR manual can be triggered for different reasons, including:
A scheduled review: It is recommended that HR policies and procedures are reviewed
periodically (i. e. every two years) to evaluate their pertinence in the company, their
compliance to new laws and requirements from clients, and their performance.
A suggestion from a competent source: Many times, internal or external stakeholders
may suggest improvements to the existing policies. These suggestions should be evaluated
and, if considered useful, integrated in the policies.
An identified problem or issue: When an issue with the policy or procedures identified,
the review process must be done immediately to correct it.
A change in legislation: Changes in labour legislation will most certainly affect the HR
manual, which will need to be reviewed to integrate them. In these cases, a legal advisor
should be consulted to make sure all revisions reflect the legal changes.
Reviewing the HR manual does not necessarily mean that it has to be modified. Instead, itis also a
way to ensure that the current practices are aligned with what is written in the manual.
5.2.
Types of changes
The HR manual might need to incorporate minor changes or major structural changes.
Adding clarifications to terms or statements
Add a small section to a policy or a complementary,
Minor changes
procedure
o Correct small mistakes
Modifying established procedures, or processes
Changes in the scope or objectives of the policy
Major changes Changes that relate to new legislation
Correct a serious inconsistency
Rewrite an entire policy
oO Oo OO 0 O
5.3.
The review processes
Revisions responsible: An HR employee should be assigned as the responsible person
for HR manual revisions (HR manager, coordinator, or another relevant staff member). This
person will be in charge of revisions and deciding the type of changes needed.
Review committee: A committee composed of experts on the company policy, including
HR personnel, general counsels or members of the board will be formed for the HR manual
review, along with workers representatives. They will be in charge of assessing the policies,
on the basis of their effectiveness, completeness, consistency, clarity and legality. They will
draft a revised policy and send for approval to the executive.
Steps for periodic revisions and major changes:
o The person responsible for revisions will set up a date for the review.
Previous to the date, she/he will send comments/suggestions to the review
committee (this can include a draft of the new policy).
The committee will meet on the designated day and decide on the revisions.
A legal adviser can be contacted to review the documents.
The new policy is sent for approval to upper management.
The revision of the policy is announced to employees and stakeholders. If
necessary, training will be delivered.
oO 0 Oo 
Steps for reviewing minor changes:
o The person responsible for revisions decides on changes to be incorporated, if
any
o He/she prepares a draft with the minor change(s)
o The draft is submitted for approval to the upper management
Make sure employees receive all significant updates to policies.
6. Daily communication and implementation of the
policies
Disseminating the policies and procedures of the HR manual is not limited to training, it is a
continuous process that needs to be taken care off to help ensure that violations and incidents are
kept to a minimum. But not only sharing the information is important, the policies need to be
enforced in every level of the company at all times.
Be sure to follow all the policies and procedures outlined in the manual. Not following
policies -even when it is done to help employees- creates confusion and leads to an
increase of violations.
Establish open communication to allow employees to ask questions. Employees should be
encouraged to ask their immediate supervisor about particular information on the policies
and how they apply to the individual employee.
If there is any grievance related to the HR policies or the communication of the policies,
this can be raised through the different grievance procedures.
Use coaching and progressive discipline to reinforce policies.
Reminders should be sent periodically to all employees outlining certain policies or aspects
of a policy that could be misunderstood or omitted in daily work.
The HR manual and all its policies should be enforced as soon as they are introduced.
Employees need to be aware of the fact that breaching rules will result in disciplinary
actions.
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Chapter 2: Recruitment and selection
Recruitment and selection are part of the basic HR functions and have a great influence on the
success of all other HR activities. Recruitment refers to the process of searching for candidates
and/or persuading them to apply for jobs in the organisation, while selection is the process of
screening the candidates and choosing the most suitable applicants for vacant positions.
Developing a fair, transparent, ethical and effective recruitment and selection practice is important
because:
+ Factories depend on a consistent supply of employees to deliver their commitments to
customers on time.
+ lt reduces the time and cost of replacement of ineffective hires.
+ It leads to attracting and hiring employees that are capable and willing to perform in their
functions, which reduces training time and cost.
+ It is one of the earliest interactions between employees and factories, which has a
determinant effect on their perception of them and their future work.
+ Positive recruitment and selection experiences of workers lead to a good reputation in the
community, which, in turn, makes future recruitment easier.
+ It paves the way to avoid future disputes with regard to unfair treatment, discrimination
and grievances.
+ Future recruitment and selection efforts become more refined as learnings are applied
and necessary modifications are made.
Equal Employment Opportunity
In the process of recruitment and selection, factories must provide equal employment
opportunity to everyone regardless of gender, ethnicity, race, national origin, religion, marital
status, political belief, or disability that does not prohibit performance of essential job
functions. All vacancies should be filled with qualified applicants based on merit against set
standards and qualifications, who have gone through a fair, objective and non-discriminatory
selection process.
Establishing an efficient recruitment and selection strategy and process that meets the factories
business strategy and goals is, therefore, a stepping stone in maximising human capital in the
factories. In order to ensure that the process is fair, transparent, and ethical, it should, needless to
say, comply with the applicable labour regulations and international conventions.
In the following sections, the chapter describes the steps that are typically found in the recruitment
and selection process. All of these steps have to be followed thoroughly in order to ensure that the
process will have the desired results i. e. finding the right candidates for each position.
1. Planning
The first step in the recruitment and selection process is planning. This will guarantee that:
20
+ The right vacancies are identified;
+ The staff hired matches the objectives and targets of the factory (based on the job
description of the position); and
+ The recruitment is adequate to address any shortage of employees and does not lead to
hiring an excessive number of employees that end up being idle.
Job Descriptions
A job description is a basic document that specifies the role and responsibilities of each
employee of the factory. It specifies the key results areas, qualifications/skills required and
how the employee is expected to behave. It includes:
= Position title
= Position summary (overall role, description)
= Reporting relationship
= Key roles and responsibilities
Developing well-written job descriptions is important as it provides the first impression to
the candidates and gives them a clear idea of the skills necessary to apply and the duties
they will be expected to perform. Unclear descriptions can later create job dissatisfaction
as employees are usually unhappy when they have to perform duties that they were not
originally hired to perform. This unhappiness, in turn, can lead to lower retention and
higher turnover rates -especially among new hires.
Planning is usually a task assigned to production managers and HR departments mainly receive
their requests. However, a more active role from the HR -in the form of providing guidance,
optimizing communication and feedback- can help to improve the recruitment process. In
particular, trends in absenteeism and leave need to be shared by the HR with the respective
departments so that they consider it in the process of planning. This can greatly contribute to
crafting a more realistic plan to meet the production targets, as well as to accurately identify skills
and knowledge needed to fill in the positions.
2. Developing a Strategy
Once the requirements of production planning are received, it is time to develop a strategy for
finding, selecting and hiring the best candidates for each position.
Having a strategy developed before randomly starting the process is a way of keeping control of
the whole process. This means that it will help to ensure that all the necessary steps are defined
and followed; the responsible people will be defined; and everything will be done in compliance
with the labour law.
3. Sourcing
Sourcing is the activity of determining which are the suitable candidates for a vacant position and
how to find them. Factories make their sourcing decisions based on production plans, existing
workforce numbers and anticipated changes in the short to medium term.
21
Sourcing is the first step in the recruitment and selection process, and it is very important because
the availability of an adequate and qualified pool of applicants determines the success of
subsequent recruitment activities.
The sourcing stage starts when the line manager of the vacant position submits to HR a Staff
Requisition Form" (a template for this form can be found in Annex | of this chapter).
Sourcing of a suitable pool of candidates may include using the following methods:
+ Internal Vacancy Announcement: Through notice board announcement or email for
upper positions (detail procedures for hiring internal and extern al candidates are presented
in Annex Il of this chapter).
+ External Vacancy Announcement: Through traditional media (print, radio), online/web-
based job boards or relevant social media.
+ Employee Referral Program: Recommendations from existing or past employees.
+ Employment Agency: Through a contract signed with agencies who strictly adhere to
applicable laws with regard to equal opportunity, labour proclamation and employment
exchange services.
+ Catchment Areas: The regional authorities can be involved in the initial sourcing (and
basic screening) of candidates in catchment areas to supply qualified candidates to
companies.
+ Career Centres in Higher Education Institutions: Through universities, colleges and
technical and vocational education training centres, internship/apprenticeship programs.
+ Walk-in Applications: Unsolicited applications from walk-in candidates.
Working with External Parties
If the factory chooses to work with external parties, it should keep a strict control on their
activities to avoid the risk of corruption in the recruitment practices and prevent the
exploitation of workers.
Bad practices include:
= Giving false information to workers regarding working conditions and
compensation
= Making false promises or selling a job interview or a position to workers in
exchange of money or sexual favours
Regardless of the methods used to source candidates, it is important that candidates submit a
complete application that contains the basic information below to avoid back and forth
communication with candidates. The next step of initial screening also becomes effective only if
the information is properly captured.
It is important to clearly communicate to workers of all the documentation needed before they
arrive to the factory and clarify that the application form will be ready for them to fill in when they
arrive to the factory. Factories have to ensure that the application form is prepared beforehand so
that it is ready when the candidate visits the factory.
22
Basic Information in an Application
= Full Name of the Candidate
= (Contact Details
= |D Card Number
= Address
= Educational qualifications with supporting documents
= Experience with supporting documents (if applicable)
= TIN Card, if available
& Pension Card, if available
4. Screening
Once an adequate number of candidates are identified, the HR department can complete initial
screening based on the minimum criteria specified in the Staff Requisition Form. This step of initial
screen
ing enables factories to exclude those applicants who are not eligible for hire and proceed
with only those who merit further screening -thereby reducing the cost of unsuitable selections in
terms
of time and effort.
Applicants should satisfy the required qualification and experience in order to be eligible for
employment. Factories should develop their own standards for recruiting, including:
Age: The minimum age for hazardous work in Ethiopia is set as 78 years. Workers between
the ages of 74 to 18 years are classified as young workers. The age of workers might be part
of the factory Code of Conduct and a special treatment for young workers is usually a
requirement of brands and international certifications. It is highly recommended that all
employees hired are more than 18 years old.
 Minimum Age for Employment
<The ILO convention on minimum age (1973) sets the general minimum age
for admission to employment or work at 15 years (13 for light work) and the
minimum age for hazardous work at 18 {16 under certain strict conditions).
Address of the candidate: The address of the candidate becomes relevant only for
enhancing understanding of what affects retention and turnover rates and also the needs
of employees. Employees who live far away from the factory might have difficulty
commuting to work, which may impact their levels of tardiness, absenteeism and fatigue.
They may also experience difficulties when required to do overtime work due to lack of
available transport to go back home at late hours. Finally, when the options for transport
are limited and commutes are long and exhausting, in the long-term, they may show lower
performance and, ultimately, may also be more likely to quit their jobs. Therefore, it is
necessary that the HR takes this factor into account only to take necessary measures to
address commute-related issues faced by the employees and never to discriminate
potential candidates. Considering the address of the candidates should never be used as a basis
for discriminating potential employees of different ethnical background. HR Managers should
23
monitor that the principle of equal employment opportunity is being applied at all times
during the recruitment process
+ Capacities: Certain positions might require that specific physical capabilities are met by
candidates -i. e. bona fide occupational qualification requirement. In such cases, employers
are allowed to consider these capabilities while making decisions about hiring employees.
For example, if a candidate with colour blindness applies to a job in a dyeing factory that
required the candidate to differentiate between colours, he/she may be excluded from the
next steps in the application process as the ability to distinguish colour is a core, necessary
capability for the position.
Shortlisted candidates from this step would be invited to continue with the next steps of the
recruitment process, i. e. the selection test.
5. Selection
Once a shortlist of candidates is identified, factories perform selection tests for a particular
position. The selection tests may range from written test, work sample test, interviews or a
combination of them. The selection test is the final step before pre-employment formalities. It
determines who will be hired, who will be on hold/reserved for next time and who will be excluded
from the employment decision.
The topics on which the candidate will be evaluated depend on the job description and will include
technical and behavioural aspects. No matter what the position is, certain aspects should be
evaluated in all candidates that will work in a factory, including:
+ Motivation: If a candidate is not motivated to work in the factory to start with, the
possibility that they will quit soon is very likely. In order to get an idea of what the level of
motivation is, HR can consider asking about: the source of information about the job (e. g.
how did the candidate get to know about this position? ) and expectations towards living
conditions (e. g. why has he/she decided to apply? what appeals to him/her about the job?
what change do they expect to see in their lives after joining the factory? ), etc.
+ Future plans: An effort has to be made to discover what the plans of the candidate are. Is
he/she hoping to make a career in manufacturing? Or is he/she just looking for a temporary
summer job and then plans to return to school?
+ Time management: Time is crucial in manufacturing and new employees will have to
adapt to very strict times and demonstrate a will to do so, including working in shifts. Useful
questions might include: How do you organise your work tasks -i. e. how do you decide
what you will do first? What do you do when you know you will not be able to complete a
task on time?
+ Working in demanding environments: Candidates should be aware and understand the
high demands of this type of job.
+ Qualification: Candidates who are overqualified are more likely to leave the position soon
and are more likely to have a difficult time adapting to the factory requirements.
The weight given to a particular test in conjunction with document review should be agreed
beforehand between the HR department and the recruiting /requesting department.
24
6. Communication
Once the selection is made, an offer with all relevant details should be given to the candidates.
Good communication with all involved parties,
including candidates, agencies, requesting
departments and other relevant actors/units, in
a professional way is one of the bases of the
image of the factory and the industrial park in
the community.
Candidates have to inform the factory if the
offer is accepted or not within an established
period of time that also has to be clearly
communicated to the
recommended to keep this time between three
candidate. It is
to five working days after receiving the offer
letter, to facilitate decision making.
Candidates who were not successful should also be notified about their results, and if necessary,
with a brief explanation as to why they have not been considered for the job. For those who met
the established criteria but were not selected, the factory should consider them for future
recruitment processes.
to apply again in the future.
potential candidates in the future.
Importance of Communication with Candidates in the Recruitment Process
All applicants that have been rejected in any step of the recruitment process should receive
a notice from the factory explaining (even if only briefly) the main reasons why they have not
been considered for the position. If relevant, the note should also encourage the applicant
Applicants dismissed without any further explanations in particular when new to the labour
market - may end up with a negative image of the factory (and the IP in general). This can
hurt the reputation of the factory and IP in the community, which can later limit the pool of
7. Documentation
Upon successful completion of the recruitment process, a personnel file of the new employee
should be created. The file should include the following documents:
Optional [only when applicable]
o Staff Requisition Form
o Minutes of the selection committee
o Application Form
o Personal Details Form
o Education and Experience testimonials
o Identification Card
o Tax Identification card
o Pension card (if available)
o Offer Letter + Job description
Resume
Cost-sharing commitment (e. g.
agreement from company to cover travel
costs of candidates, etc. )
o Results of medical tests if performed (e. g.
colour blindness test, etc. )
o Official Credentials/Licenses (e. g. driving
license)
o Feedback from previous employer
25
8. After Recruiting: Retention
Once the new employee(s) starts to work in the factory, the challenge continues: the HR
department has to focus efforts in retaining all the
workforce that brings value to the organisation. Retention
is a continuing process in the relationship with the
employee. It never stops. Failing to retain employees costs
Employee turnover is one of the
major problems that factories face.
Understanding, preventing and
tackling turnover requires an efficient
all the time and resources invested in recruiting, hiring, on- and comprehensive approach and
boarding and training them. retention strategies.
Some strategies for retention include:
Delivering an onboarding training that covers all the necessary topics for new employees
in order to enable them to perform in their new positions. This involves assigning enough
time to the onboarding process and considering not only the technical aspects of the job,
but all the soft skills that will facilitate good performance.
Providing continuous training to all employees for them to acquire new skills, be able to
increase their performance and feel motivated and capable of building a career in the
factory.
Establishing a performance-based culture that rewards good performance and helps to
improve the performance of those who are having difficulties in reaching their targets.
Involving the employee in setting up their objectives, understanding their capabilities and
making plans to improve their performance. This will help to generate ownership,
responsibility and a sense of belonging.
Offering competitive salaries and benefits that guarantee, at the very minimum, the
physical subsistence of workers and their families. A salary that is not enough to have
access to food, housing, transport and the basic needs for a decent living standard will not
help retain employees.
Encouraging top performers to develop a career in the factory assigning responsibilities
and promoting them to higher positions with the required training to increase their
knowledge and develop new skills. Promotion procedures have to be fair and transparent.
Creating a working environment that promotes communication between all levels, sets
up clear rules for behaviour in the factory and applies them consistently without
differentiating among employees.
The next chapters of this HR Guideline are meant to help all factories in Ethiopian industrial parks
to develop a working environment that boosts worker satisfaction and happiness, and improves
retention.
26
Annex I: Staff Requisition Form
O New Position O Budgeted and Approved Replacement for a Vacancy
O Temporary Cover from to (insert dates)
1. Education:
2. Experience:
3. Other Skills/Special Competencies:
27
Annex Il: Detailed Procedures for Internal and External
Recruitment
Internal Recruitment
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
The filling of a budgeted vacancy will commence with an approved Staff Requisition Form
indicating that a particular vacancy exists. This must be done after carefully examining the
planning requirements.
This form must be completed and signed by the requesting Line Manager, and approved by the
relevant Department Manager.
In the case of non-budgeted salaried vacancies, approval needs to be obtained from the Human
Resources Manager.
The Staff Requisition Form shall include minimum education levels and the required experience
aligned to the job description. It should also clearly define the skills, special competencies (if any)
required for the job.
Using the Staff Requisition Form & Job Description, the HR department will draw up an
announcement which is to be reviewed by the HR Manager & the concerned Line Manager.
Vacancy announcement will first be advertised to all internal applicants through notice boards &
intranet or company email address (if available and applicable).
Applications are to be received for at least ten consecutive days from the date of announcement.
Applicants must clearly indicate their educational background, work experience, their full name,
address & the desired position (for internal candidate) in their application.
The HR department will be preliminarily responsible to screen applicants using the criteria set out
on the vacancy announcement.
HR, in consultation with the relevant Line Manager (or his/her delegate), will determine a list of
candidates who best suit the job requirements to appear for the selection process.
An ad-hoc selection committee comprising of at least an HR department representative & the
requesting department's representative assigned by the Manager shall be established to decide
the selection criteria, selection tools & conduct the selection process. The HR Officer will be
responsible for setting up of the selection process, advising candidates of the date, time and
venue.
If it is necessary to conduct a written / practical exam, the requesting department shall prepare
and submit to HR latest before 2 working days before the exam date.
In case of conducting a written exam, the HR department shall code the exam for evaluation, the
candidate will take the exam and the HR Officer who is leading the recruitment process shall
decode and compile the results.
The selection committee shall sign a memorandum of understanding by indicating the selection
criteria, pass mark and other details. If the selection criteria set by the committee is more than
one, the pass mark should be indicated for each criterion to carry on to the next process.
The selection committee, based on the obtained information using the selection tools, will select
the most suitable candidate.
The final selection will take place based on the cumulative effect of all selection criteria outlined
in the MOU. HR shall lead & evaluate whether the recruitment process has been carried out per
the company policy & the approved MOU.
As deemed necessary, the selected candidates by the ad - hoc committee, may be assessed by
the HR manager and the Department Manager, to select the most suitable candidate.
28
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
Candidates selected for management positions may be interviewed by the Head of the
organisation for final approval.
Once selection decision is made, the Department Manager and HR Manager will issue the job offer
with all relevant details.
If the candidate who is selected for the position is not interested to assume the position, then
he/she has to inform the HR function within three working days after receiving the offer letter.
After filling the position, qualified candidates who met the pass mark will be held in a standby list
for upcoming requisition for the same position provided that the position needs to be filled in
within six months.
Internal regret letters/emails will be sent to unsuccessful candidates after the interview by the
Human Resources Manager & Department Manager. In case of workers, who may not have emails,
they will be contacted via telephone or any other relevant medium and be informed about their
result.
Recruitment file shall be built to follow up the process in documenting of all necessary materials
& shall be maintained for a minimum of one year.
External recruitment
If a vacant position could not be filled with an internal source, the HR department will recommend
external recruitment.
Accordingly, a vacancy announcement is to be compiled and placed through the company's
preferred newspaper, employment agency website or any appropriate media to attract the
appropriate talent.
Any advertisement in a newspaper, website or any appropriate media shall contain a brief
description of the company as well as the following details as a very minimum:
a. Job Title, reporting line and location of position
Duties and Responsibilities
Required level of education training and experience
Any other relevant skills or special requirements
Indicate to whom and how the application must be made
Last date for submission of applications
The HR department will receive all applications and answer any telephonic inquiries.
Applications are to be received for at least ten consecutive days from the date of the
announcement.
address & their desired position in their application. In cases where jobseekers directly apply to
the factory, it is possible to use a simple but factory-specific application form that they can fill to
attach to their own documents prepared for submission.
The HR department is responsible to screen the list of external applicants using the criteria set
out on the announcement.
HR, in consultation with the relevant Department Manager (or delegate), will determine a list of
candidates who best suit the job requirements for the selection process.
An ad-hoc selection committee comprising of at least an HR department representative and a
representative of the hiring department shall be established to decide the selection criteria,
selection tools & conduct the selection process.
The HR department will be in charge of setting up the selection process and informing candidates
about the date, time and venue of the test/interview.
=p ono
29
24.
25.
If a written / practical exam is conducted, the relevant department shall prepare and submit it to
HR by latest 3 working days before the exam date.
The selection committee shall sing a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) indicating the
selection criteria, pass mark and other details. If the section criteria set by the committee is more
than one, the pass mark should be indicated for each criterion to carry on to the next process.
Following the short-listing, the most suitable candidates will be assessed following the company
policies.
The final selection will be taking place based on the cumulative effect of all selection criteria
outlined in the MOU. HR shall lead & ensure whether the recruitment process is carried out per
the company policy and the approved MOU.
As deemed necessary, the selected candidates by the recruitment ad - hoc committee, may be
assessed by the HR Manager and the Department Manager to select the most suitable candidate.
Candidates selected for management positions shall be interviewed by the General
Manager/Head of the organisation for final approval.
he/she has to inform the HR function within a set period of time after receiving the offer letter.
External regret letters/emails should be sent to unsuccessful candidates. In case of workers, who
may not have emails, they will be contacted via telephone or any other relevant medium and be
informed about their result.
After filling the position, qualified candidates who met the pass mark will be held in a roster of
pre-approved candidates for up to one year.
The responsible HR Manager/Officer will conduct reference checks on the identified candidate,
when applicable. The current employer of the candidate will not be contacted unless the candidate
has given his/her expressed permission for this course of action. Ideally, a minimum of two
references from previous employers should be obtained.
A recruitment file shall be built to follow up the process in documenting of all necessary materials
Queries from unsuccessful candidates are to be handled by the HR department representative
handling the specific recruitment action. A minimum of one week prior to the new employee
commencing employment, the HR Manager/ Officer will contact the new hire to advice on
onboarding details and answer any questions the new recruit may have.
30
Annex Ill: Employment of relatives (optional guideline)
In order to avoid prejudice, nepotism and undesirable practices to the extent possible, the factory can
develop a policy to be applied for the employment of relatives of employees by affinity or
consanguinity.
a. Definitions
1) Consanguinity shall include a person's parents, grandparents, children, brother, sister, uncle,
aunt, niece, nephew and cousin.
2) Affinity shall include one's spouse his /her parents, children, brother and sister.
b. Present Employees
If there are persons related by consanguinity or affinity working in the same unit/ team, section or
department prior to the establishment of this policy, one or more of such employees may be
transferred laterally to a different unit, section or department. In such cases, the employees
concerned may agree and express their preference as to who shall be transferred, failing which
employees, with lesser seniority in the company shall be subject to the transfer unless it is decided
that they are needed more in the unit, section or department concerned than the senior employees
to which they are related.
c. New Employees/Transfer
An applicant for employment or transfers to a unit, section or department shall not be employed or
transferred to such unit, section or department if he/she is related by affinity or consanguinity to
another employee of the unit, section or department. However, if recruiting of an individual is very
important & it is clearly understood that prejudice, nepotism and undesirable practices will not arise
due to the nature of the job, a waiver shall be initiated to recruit the candidate in the department with
the approval of the HR Manager.
d. Disclosure of Affinity / Consanguinity
Existing employee shall disclose their affinity or consanguinity to the company for the implementation
of this policy. Candidates shall disclose same during application process. Failure to disclose pertinent
information may result in termination.
31
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Chapter 3: Employee onboarding
1. The benefits of onboarding
Onboarding is the process of integrating new employees into the organisation by providing them with
tools, knowledge, skills and attitudes that are necessary to perform their role effectively, achieve job
satisfaction and understand the culture of the factory. Since industrialisation is relatively new in
Ethiopia and most of the population comes from rural areas, many workers need to be introduced to
the industrial work culture and to an urban lifestyle. Against this background, a comprehensive
onboarding process is crucial to properly integrate workers to their new role and work environment, help
them transition to their new living conditions, and thereby, promote retention and workplace satisfaction.
An effective onboarding training programme has numerous benefits for the employees and the
organisation, including:
+ It ensures understanding and compliance with the factory's vision, mission, philosophy, and
objectives.
+ It assists employees in understanding the factory's culture (i. e. values, attitudes, accepted
norms of behaviour) and structure (i. e. rules and processes in relation to working hours, code
of conduct and disciplinary procedures, over-time policy, leave policy, grievances handling,
career and growth opportunities, and performance evaluation, among others).
 It builds awareness not only regarding benefits offered to employees by the factory but also
about their roles and responsibilities. This helps employees understand what the factory's
expectations are and what the employee receives in return.
+ It helps to develop the needed attitude; skill sets and competencies to fulfil the role.
+ It contributes to developing a sense of trust between the new employee and the factory, and
helps the employee to feel more comfortable with the new environment.
+ It helps to increase employee engagement, motivation and retention, which also translates
into less attrition and turnover of employees.
+ It accelerates the employees process to becoming contributing members that add value to
the factory.
Most of the employees make the decision of whether to stay or not in the factory within their first
months of work. A good onboarding process that enables workers to feel confident about their new
skills; that helps them understand the needs of the industry and their role in the factory; and that
introduces them to the factory culture, structure, and internal sources of support in cases of doubts
or concerns is a must if factories want to improve retention rates. Needless to say, this is not only
applicable to operators and supervisors but managers and middle managers as well. They also have
to be properly onboarded to their roles and responsibilities and provided with the basic skills that
they will require to confidently fulfil their tasks.
32
Despite the importance of onboarding, lack of planning sometimes leads to trainings that are
conducted in a rush, without considering all relevant topics nor adequate methods for ensuring that
the content is understood by the employees. To help HR departments in Ethiopia's IPs with the task
of providing effective onboarding, this chapter provides a basis for designing and planning a
comprehensive, high-quality and impactful onboarding programme. As the technical skills will vary
from industry to industry, both in content and length, the guidelines in the next sections focus on
basic standards to be applied to all other training topics (such as soft skills, company culture, HR).
Finally, it should be noted that training does not end with the onboarding sessions. The upskilling of
the workforce is a continuous process that promotes improvements in workers performance and
their career development in the factory. As this chapter is focused on onboarding, ongoing training
and development are covered in a separate chapter, Chapter 4: Training and Development.
2. The onboarding plan
2.1. Target audience
New employees
Onboarding new employees should be done as soon as they start to work in the factory, with a clear
schedule and comprehensive agenda for all employees.
The onboarding should take a minimum of 3 days and
up to one week in order to make sure that all relevant
topics are thoroughly covered and that a learning
process has taken place. The technical training of
employees will usually take longer and it will depend on
the specific industry and position.
Implementing a buddy system can be
very helpful for newcomers to adapt to the
new working environment faster. It
involves assigning an existing employee
who guides the newcomer through the first
few weeks or months on the job
A common practice that should be avoided is to deliver onboarding sessions randomly depending on
production needs as the risk of losing coherence between training sessions, not delivering all the
content or rushing through the topics due to the lack of time is high. It is necessary to keep in mind at
all times that good-quality onboarding training is key to retention and workplace satisfaction, and
high-quality depends on how comprehensive, coherent and structured the training programme is.
In addition, take into account that the introduction to employees to a company starts before the
onboarding training and ends sometime after it.
+ During the recruiting phase: The employees-to-be receive information and, based on this,
form impressions of the company. Special care should be taken since the first contact with the
employee, making sure that they always receive clear and accurate information and/or
instructions on all relevant topics.
+ After the onboarding training: Refresher trainings have to be provided regularly to
strengthen and consolidate newly acquired knowledge. These refresher trainings can be
conducted by direct supervisors/ managers.
33
Promoted employees
Onboarding training should also be provided to employees that have been promoted and, therefore,
start a new position in the factory. Whenever an employee acquires new responsibilities, it is
necessary to train him/her with the skills necessary to be able to perform in that position. Failing to
prepare the employee for the new position will not only affect his/her performance level but also
decrease the level of workplace satisfaction.
In case of workers promoted to supervisors, itis particularly important to ensure that they go through
an induction process that allows them to develop not only the new technical tasks that they will need,
but also the soft skills required to successfully manage their team. Not planning a comprehensive
onboarding training to endow them with the necessary tools to succeed in their new position has
negative effects in the production, in team work and in the job satisfaction and morale of both the
newly-promoted supervisors and the workers under their guidance.
2.2. Onboarding Content
General content
No matter the position in the factory, there is general knowledge all employees need to learn. An
overview of topics that should be included is provided in the table below.
34
The topics above should be covered for all employees and, in addition, supplementary sessions should
be prepared and tailored to meet the needs of different positions (i. e. operators, middle management
and management).
Specific content for operators
Many operators who start working in IPs come from rural areas and are not yet familiar with the
challenges {and comforts} of living in the city. As most of them lack previous working experience in
factories, working in manufacturing is often also novel to them. Onboarding must, therefore, include
an introduction to new living conditions in order to avoid frustration and contribute to a smoother
adaptation process. Below is a recommendation of topics to be included in the onboarding process
of operators.
Specific content for the middle managers and managers
The management and middle management level, in particular new graduates that are to start a job in
a manufacturing for the first time, must also understand the functioning of factories, their
responsibilities and the skills that need to be developed to perform their work.
A particular issue that has been highlighted by operating factories in Ethiopian IPs is the lack of soft
skills, low motivation and unrealistic expectations of new graduates. This challenge has to be tackled
from the very beginning. The onboarding of these employees should, therefore, clearly state their
responsibilities, explain performance evaluation and clarify their career opportunities within the
The onboarding period is also a good moment to detect motivation, dedication and skills that were
possibly not observed in the recruiting period.
o Leadership and communication skills
o Conflict management
o Problem-solving skills
3. Onboarding delivery method
Almost as important as the content of the onboarding training is the training delivery method. Below
is a list of tips that will help you ensure the effectiveness of your training.
Participatory methods such as role plays, action learning and storytelling should be used to
improve not only the understanding and ownership of the knowledge, but also the
concentration level of participants and interest showed during the sessions.
+ A program with the schedule should be delivered to employees before they start the on-
boarding training, for them to familiarize with the topics beforehand and to keep track of what
they are learning. This document should specify the name of the trainers and the timetable.
Key departments should be engaged in the preparation of the training and should select
speakers to greet and brief the new starters on specific topics. This helps participants to better
know the factory and to feel that the company cares about them.
Handouts with the information on all the topics covered should be delivered to the employees.
These must be written in the regions main language. The style of the handbook must be clean
and simple, easy for everyone to understand. Pictures should be included when they allow a
better understanding of a subject.
+ The onboarding training should be included in the records of all participants. This should
include a checklist with all topics in which they have/ have not participated (a template can be
found in Annex I of this chapter)
4. Onboarding review
As with every training, the effectiveness of the onboarding has to be evaluated.
+ After the onboarding training, seek feedback from all participants through a survey (you can
find a template in Annex Il of this chapter).
+ If new starters leave during or soon after completing the induction period, an interview with
them will give key information to improve not only the onboarding but also the recruitment
process.
+ Feedback of direct supervisors and managers can also collaborate to continuously improve
the onboarding plan.
36
Annex I: Onboarding Checklist Template for new hires
Employee name:
Employee ID #:
Job title:
Department:
Supervisor/Manager:
Starting date:
General Onboarding Training
a Introduction of the organization
a Information on industry and supply chain
ad Factory layout
0 Contact numbers
Probationary period and employment contract
Workers' rights and responsibilities
Working hours, shifts, overtime
Time keeping
Salary (incl. salary structure)
Benefits (transport, meals, etc. )
Performance and attendance
Career opportunities
Leave
yy yy yy
a Code of conduct
a Disciplinary Procedure
a Absenteeism and tardiness
a Sexual Harassment and discrimination
0 Workers committees/ TU
QO Information sources
QO Grievance procedure
ad Importance of good communication
a ID cards usage
ad Occupational health and safety
37
Description of the tasks
Connection of the tasks to the team and factory's performance
Supervision of the job
Performance indicators / job objectives
Performance appraisals
Promotion opportunities
I Ry yy
Specific Onboarding Training (extra topics for workers)
ad Personal hygiene
Qa Banking (incl. using ATMs)
a Nutrition (food and water intake)
a Sexual and reproductive health
a Time management in the factory
Qa Team work
Specific Onboarding Training (extra topics for supervisors and middle management
level)
a Leadership and communication skills
a Conflict management
a Problem-solving skills
Advanced supply chain and compliance
Communication channels in the factory
Enforcing policies and procedures
Productivity
Labour law
ooooo
38
Annex Il: Onboarding Feedback template for new hires
(general training)
Employee name: |
Department: |
have a good understanding of our factory and your future work.
In order to make sure that all your doubts are solved, we would like to ask you to complete this
questionnaire. Please take your time to reflect on each question and answer it very honestly. It will
help us to know what topics we should reinforce in the future.
Thank you very much!
Task: How much did you understand or do you remember about these topics? Choose between:
 | didn't understand much or | cant remember well
 | understood some information but | wish | knew more
+ lunderstood completely and can remember everything
1 didnt 1 understood some | | understood
understand much/ | information but | completely and
| cant remember wish | knew more | can remember
all
General Knowledge of the
factory
1 What does (Name of the factory)
produce, who are their main clients
and what are their goals
2 How is the factory organized
3 Who should | contact for questions
and emergencies, their names and
how to contact them
Employment
4 How long does the probation period
last
5 What is written in my employment
contract
6 What are my rights as a worker
What are my responsibilities as a
worker
8 What are the working hours in the
9 What is overtime, when and why is it
needed and how is it paid
39
10 | What is my salary and how is it
calculated
11 What benefits do | get for working in
this factory
12 | What is a performance bonus and
how can | get it
13 | What is an attendance bonus and how
can | get it
14 | Which are the career opportunities for
working in this factory
15 | What are the types of leave that | can
take
16 | When should | ask for leave and how
can doit
Behaviour in the factory
17 | What are the rules of behaviour in the
18 | What is considered sexual harassment
19 | What happens if | break the factory
rules
20 | Can be late to work? What are the
consequences of me being late (for
me and for my co-workers)
21 Can | be absent to work without
notice? What are the consequences
for me and for my co-workers
22 | What is the procedure to follow when |
need to be absent
Communication
23 | What is the worker committee / trade
union and how can | reach them
24 | Where can | find relevant information
in the factory (i. e. shifts, rules, news,
etc. )
25 | How can | communicate any problem,
concern or grievance
26 | How should | communicate with my
co-workers, supervisors and managers
Security and Safety
27 | When should | use my identification
card (ID card) in the factory and the
Industrial Park
28 | What hazards are there in the factory
and how can we prevent accidents
29 | What is not allowed in the production
floor
30 | What personal protective equipment
do | have to use at work
31 What should I do in the case of a fire
32 | What should | do if | see something
that threatens safety (i. e. aisles or
40
exits blocked, dirty toilets? no
personal protective equipment)
Performance
33 | What does my team produce in the
34 | How is our work important in the
What would happen if we do not
perform
35 | Who is my supervisor/manager and
what is her/his role
36 | What are my job objectives
37 | How is my performance monitored
and evaluated
38 | How is my performance rewarded
39 | What happens if | dont perform as
expected
41
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Chapter 4: Training and development
1. The benefits of training
Efforts made to train and develop the workforce have proven to have numerous benefits. In relation
to productivity, upskilled workers are more efficient and, therefore, produce not only greater
quantities but also better-quality products in less time. This improvement in efficiency and quality, in
turn, ensures that production targets are reached faster (ILO, 2016) and boosts the factories
competitiveness in the global market.
However, the benefits of training are not limited to the area of productivity. Training has also proven
to have a positive impact on the stability of the workforce. Trained and skilled workers tend to show
more loyalty to factories. They also feel more motivated to further develop themselves, not only to
earn better salaries and move to better positions but also to, ultimately, improve their living
conditions. This motivation often translates into lower turnover and absenteeism rates and higher
wage-satisfaction rates, as workers are enabled to earn higher salaries.
A good example of the positive effects that training has on productivity and the workforce in general,
is the case of the ready-made garment industry in Cambodia, Bangladesh and India. Training
programs in factories in these countries have resulted in the following impacts: 2
+ More than 29% efficiency improvement
Approx. 12% increase in the hourly payment
 Upto 25% increase in revenue-to-cost ratio
 Upto 34% reduction in absenteeism rates
 Upto 66% increase in retention rates
0 Lo
 More than 50 Jo reduction in worker turnover
+ Spill over effects for non-trainees, who work closely with those who have been trained
2. The challenge of training
With the expansion of manufacturing in Ethiopia, there has been a growing demand for skilled
workers and managers. The Ethiopian government has taken several initiatives to develop the
countrys workforce and to equip them with the knowledge and abilities required to address this
2 Hurst, Nanda et al, ILO, Adhvaryu el at, as cited in Hearle (2016). Skills, Employment and Productivity in the
Garments and Construction Sectors in Bangladesh and elsewhere. Oxford Policy Management.
42
demand. Many factories have tried to complement the government's efforts by training their own staff
in the technical and soft skills that meet their specific needs.
The efforts made by the factories have, however, been met with limited success due to a number of
reasons. First, even if HR departments are fully aware of the benefits of training, they are often
assigned scarce resources (incl. a low budget) for this purpose. Second, to exacerbate this problem,
time is often not allocated for workers and staff to be trained and tight production plans don't not
take training into account. Finally, although trainings take place in the factories, they often lack a
clearly defined structure. As a result, the lack of proper training leads to factories being caught in a
vicious cycle: low productivity and high turnover put more production pressure on the factory. Due to
higher production pressure and, partly, due to fear of investing in staff that might afterwards leave to
other factories, factories invest less resources (e. g. time, workers) into training and development. The
lack of comprehensive training prevents the workforce from developing, which leads to their inability
to meet production targets. This, in turn, contributes to their feeling stressed and frustrated, which
results in their losing motivation and, consequently, a decrease in performance. And the lack of skills,
decrease in motivation and the drop-in performance lead to turnover and low productivity.
drop in low productivity
performance + high turnover
frustration high production
+ demotivation pressure
less resources +
importance given to
training
inability to meet
targets
Clr unskilled
workers
How can factories avoid or get out of this vicious cycle? Well planned, quality, high-impact training can
help factories avoid falling into this trap and get out of it. As shown previously, with the appropriate
structure and methods, training can be an investment that provides multiple sustainable benefits for the
factory and the workers.
43
In the following sections, this guideline will provide practical advice on training and challenges that
are common to all factories in Ethiopia's IPs. It will not discuss technical aspects of training as they are
highly dependent on the specific needs of each factory, nor will it cover induction training topics as
these are addressed in Chapter 3.
3. Analysing training needs: the training needs assessment
In high-paced environments such as modern factories, it is necessary to keep track of the skill
development needs that exist at different levels. Assessing these needs is vital to channel efforts into
the areas and departments that will contribute the most to the factory performance. A training needs
assessment is an analysis of the current skill gaps in the company and includes both technical and
soft skills.
3.1. What to assess?
Training needs assessments can be performed at the organisational, task or individual level.
Macro-level assessment to identify current gaps at the factory level.
It allows to focus training efforts on what is really needed to improve performance. It requires good
understanding of the overall organisation, the priorities of different departments and goals, and how they all
contribute to the overall success of the factory.
Questions that this assessment can help answer include: What are the most challenging departments/issues?
What are the recurrent problems the factory faces?
Department-level assessment to understand the gaps in relation to the tasks that each job includes.
For example, when analysing gaps of supervisors in a factory, an assessment should look at: How are they
performing overall? What problems do they have? What needs to be improved in their job?
It is recommended to involve department heads.
Individual-focused assessment analyses the level of performance of employees, identifies current skills
qualification, their capacity for learning and their willingness to learn. It is recommended to involve direct
supervisors/ managers of the individuals.
3.2. How to conduct the assessment?
There are different ways in which to conduct a training needs assessment. Selecting one depends on
availability and the type of assessment that will be conducted. Below are some suggestions for each
type of assessment.
o Interviews with managers are a good starting point for this assessment as they can provide an overall view
of the production process and the main challenges encountered.
o Interviews with department heads can help understand how each department is performing and what
challenges are the most important in relation to skills and internal processes.
o Interviews with department heads or group interviews with staff can also help to detect gaps in other
departments as they inform us about how the relationship and synergy with other departments of the
o Surveys with workers help to see things from their perspective and detect issues that might not be clearly
perceived by other staff. This can contribute to a deeper and holistic understanding of the skill gaps at the
organisational level.
o Interviews with department heads provide insights into the tasks performed by each role in the
department and, also, into the general skill gaps detected among their staff.
o Interviews with employees contribute to gaining a deeper understanding on the gaps, the reasons behind
the gaps and how to develop the skills.
o Direct observation of certain processes is also a valuable source of information to understand skill gaps.
o Surveys with employees which evaluate their skills on specific tasks help to find common skill gaps in
different roles.
o Interviews with direct supervisors/ managers provide the first insight to individual employees
gaps.
o Revision of HR Records:
 Performance appraisals clarify job objectives that can be linked to specific skills that need to be
developed by the employee.
e Training records show what trainings have been provided to the employee and their effectiveness.
o Interviews with the individuals provide insights into their own perception of their skill gaps,
their motivation to develop new skills, the challenges they perceive, and what methods would
be most adequate for the candidate.
3.3. When to conduct the assessment?
It is recommended to do training needs assessments periodically with realistic timelines. Generally,
once a year is a good and realistic option. However, needs can pop up and the HR department should
be able to respond quickly to address them. To be able to respond promptly, the HR department
should maintain good communication with all departments. Good and regular communication with
the different departments will help the HR to both quickly identify skill development needs and to
promptly find solutions to bridge the gaps detected.
3.4. What to do with the results of the assessment?
Once the results of the assessment are analysed and the gaps are identified, the next step is to make
an informed decision on what gaps to address first and also on the type of action that needs to be
taken.
1. Set up priorities: In case gaps have been identified, it is necessary to prioritise. Issues related
to legal aspects and compliance should be given a higher priority and immediate action must
be taken if a gap has been detected in those fields e. g. discrimination, corruption, insufficient
PPE, etc.
2. Define the objective of the training: After deciding which gaps to address, reflect about
them, determine how the factory would like to solve them and then decide on what goals
would be achieved by the training. For some gaps, on-the-job training or one short training
may be sufficient, whereas for others, it might be necessary to implement a series of long-
term actions. For example, let's imagine that a factory in the garment industry identified a lack
of multi-skilled sewing operators. To address this issue, it was decided that the best way
forward is training existing operators to become multi-skilled rather than recruiting new multi-
skilled operators. Accordingly, the objective was to train 60 multi-skilled sewing operators in
the next 4 months. From this, it is clear that, to achieve this objective, short one-off trainings
will not suffice. Training will most likely have to be long-term and could mix relatively intensive
training in the beginning and then on-the-job coaching at later stages.
3. Understand the costs: Once itis clear what the training programme should achieve and what
it should look like, make a calculation of the costs of the training action(s) selected. This will
include costs of planning, preparing material, external costs e. g. hiring external trainers, and
indirect costs such as the employment costs of the workers for the time they participate in the
training. This will help to also understand how many resources (investment) the training
programme requires.
4. But also understand the benefits: Calculate the benefits that may be achieved through the
training as well. Will productivity increase? Will turnover decrease? A decrease on costs related
to court cases? What is the financial value of them? Understanding what value, the training
may bring to the factory helps to make a better decision on whether to and how much to
invest in the training.
5. Calculate ROI: Having understood the costs and benefits, the next step is to calculate the
return on investment (ROI) of the training.
46
ROI = (programme benefits/programme costs) x 100%
Please note that these calculations (cost, benefits and ROI) will only be helpful when based on
real and credible data. If there is no such data, the data is not reliable or it is not updated, then
the calculations will lose their meaning and will not be helpful for deciding on whether to
invest in training. In this case, it will be necessary to try to weigh the pros and cons based on
other information and apply other rationale to explain the impact of the training.
Documentation: The training needs assessment results, the evaluation and selection of training
plans and all decisions made must be properly documented. This will help the factory keep track
of past and current assessments and facilitate the understanding of the gaps that have been
identified, the measures have been implemented to address them and their effectivity.
4. Developing training capacities in the factory
In order to address the need to conduct training, factories often assign departments or specific
employees to be in charge of this task. However, regardless of whether the factory has its own training
department, specific training personnel or a group of employees who train others, in any case, there
are some guidelines needed to ensure the effectiveness of the trainings. These guidelines are:
+ Clear communication: Trainers need to communicate clearly, precisely and confidently.
+ Effective presentation: Trainers should be able to present the information in a way that is
easily understood by the target audience. They should provide context for the information
that is delivered, such as reasons, effects, linkages to other activities, etc. This will help create
awareness and increase acceptance/importance of the subject.
+ Combination of teaching techniques and participation: Trainers should avoid sticking to
just presenting information as it is not effective for long-term learning. Use participatory
methods such as role plays, action learning and storytelling to get the message across.
+ Audience awareness and gender sensitivity: Keep in mind who the audience is and tailor
the training to them. This involves taking into account criteria such as age, level of literacy and
gender. Special attention should be given to gender aspects to ensure the training is gender
sensitive {see below for explanation).
47
Gender Sensitive Trainings
 Trainings must be sensitive to the needs of men and woman at every stage.
= Trainings should equally benefit men and women.
= Trainers must understand gender dimensions related to the subject.
= Visual representations should not promote gender stereotypes.
= Cultural aspects regarding gender must be considered. For example, in certain roles
and cultures, women tend to be less vocal and shyer. In these cases, trainers must
make a special effort to encourage women to speak up.
<= There must be an atmosphere of listening and respect for everyone's experiences and
views,
+ During the training: Check the energy level in the group and how well participants
understand the concepts.
+ Content is king and method is queen: Content is key. However, keep in mind that the
method is almost as important as the content. Using the wrong training method will result in
less impact.
Skills to follow these guidelines should be developed in anyone delivering training in the factory. This
includes not only staff in the training department, managers but also supervisors (including line
supervisors), as they are in direct contact with workers and have a key role in their development.
5. Conducting training
5.1. Suggested Training Topics
Training needs are identified by each organisation through the training needs assessment. However,
based on the analysis of the challenges and needs of manufacturing facilities in Ethiopia, a list of topics
that should be considered for each position is presented below.
Operators
As Ethiopia is relatively new to industrial culture, workers - in particular those coming from rural areas
- need to learn not only technical skills to perform their duties, but also a set of soft skills that allow
them to adapt to the factory environment. While most of the training on life skills is done during the
on-boarding, further training should be provided for enhancing their understanding of the industry.
Suggested topics are:
+ Productivity
+ Financial literacy and planning
 OHS
Team work
+ Work ethics, responsibilities and obligations of employees
+ Intercultural awareness and competences
+ Conflict management
48
The WEAR model
An effective training tool that can save costs and time to factories is the use of audio-visuals to
develop operators soft skills. Enterprise Partners has developed the WEAR (Worker Engagement
And Retention tool) model, to support industrial behavioural change trough audio-visual
supported learning tools that introduce workers to 10 thematic soft skill areas. In addition to the
audio-visuals, tools such as facilitators guidelines and flashcards in Amharic, Tigrigna and Oromifa
are provided to foster engagement in the sessions and facilitate peer-learning.
Supervisors
The role of supervisors in the factory is one of the most important ones - not only in relation to
production but also regarding discipline and motivation of the employees. Supervisors are in direct
contact with the workers and are accountable for their lines, often finding themselves in stressful
situations. Helping supervisors better deal with these situations and their tasks can greatly benefit the
factory. Studies have found that production lines If workers are promoted to supervisors without
being supervised by better prepared supervisors any further trainings, the lack of skills and
show higher levels of productivity and quality knowledge on managing a team results in
(Hearle, 2016). pressure and stress for both workers and
supervisors. As a coping strategy, supervisors
might adopt unhelpful or even harmful
management techniques like verbal or physical
+ Intercultural awareness and competences abuse.
+ Leadership and team building
 Motivation and feedback
+ Communication in the factory supervisor Skills building programme.
e Stress & anger management
+ Dispute resolution & conflict management / negotiation skills
 Harassment and discrimination
+ Disciplinary procedure and labour law
Some key training topics to develop the skills of
supervisors are:
Fair Wear Foundation (2018) The Fair wear Foundation
Managers and middle managers
Managers in all levels also need to acquire the skills to work in the fast-paced environment of export-
oriented manufacturing facilities. Some of the key areas that have to be developed are:
+ Workplace communication
+ Leadership and coaching
+ Decision making and problem-solving skills
+ Dispute resolution / negotiation skills
49
Diversity management and anti-discrimination/ harassment
Supply chain
Intercultural barriers: When most of the top management consists of expats new to the Ethiopian
culture, conflicts rooted in intercultural clashes are likely to arise. Providing serious training on
intercultural competences to the expat managers, the Ethiopian middle managers and workers
will contribute greatly to a better understanding and communication in the factory.
6. Evaluating training delivery effectiveness
After the training has been delivered, it is highly recommended to evaluate its effectiveness. Assessing
the success of trainings helps the HR department to:
6.1.
Understand what went right and what went wrong
Improve future rounds of training
Share the impacts of training with the management and the organisation
Increase the motivation to invest in training
What to measure?
There are different aspects that need to be considered when evaluating training delivery and
effectiveness.
Evaluate the overall training plan: Does the plan cover all the gaps detected in the training
needs assessment? How many trainings are being delivered? How many people have received
training?
Evaluate the effectiveness of technical training: How has productivity changed after the
training? Has quality improved? Has the effect lasted long term?
Evaluate the effectiveness of soft skills training: Have productivity and quality improved?
How many disciplinary issues have been reported since? How satisfied are workers with their
supervisor/ manager?
7. How to start? Useful recommendations to get started
Even when the HR Department knows what has to be done to develop skills in an organisation, it
might be challenging to take the first step into action. Here are some recommendations to make the
journey easier:
Base training on the training needs assessment(s): Base trainings on needs rather than,
for example, on gut feeling or individual suggestions. This will guarantee that the trainings
have valuable impact and are aligned to the companys strategic goals.
Start with pilot groups/ lines: Training the entire workforce of the factory from the first go
can be difficult if not impossible. Therefore, it is not recommendable to start too ambitiously
as this often translates into fast, superficial trainings that do not ensure that a real learning
50
process takes place. For this reason, starting with pilot groups or single lines is a good option.
It allows to evaluate {and show) impact and finetune the details for future trainings.
+ Trainings should be aligned with the production calendar: giving more space to trainings
when there is lower pressure on production, and limiting the time of the trainings when the
pressure is high.
+ Notify participants and their superiors early enough: (at least a week in advance is
suggested) so that they can rearrange their line/workspace and find a replacement in time.
Reminders though the PA system on the day of the training can be helpful to make sure
everyone arrives on time.
 Train critical lines/workers/staff: Input from performance appraisals and production data
will help identify underperformers and organise immediate training for them.
+ Do not forget top performers: A mistake that must be avoided is to forget about top
performers by focusing too much on the critical ones. The results can be devastating: loss of
motivation, decrease in productivity and eventually leaving the factory. Companies have to
take care of their best performing human capital. Provide training (e. g. soft skills training) to
the best workers to increase their possibilities of promotion and keep them motivated. They
will be able to lead by example and their confidence will be boosted.
+ Evaluate the results of training closely: In both technical and soft skills training, plan how
to assess its results and take action. If training has been provided to certain lines/ groups, it is
useful to observe differences in performance between those who have received the training
and those who have not.
+ Improve further trainings: Work to improve future trainings based on the results of your
evaluation.
+ Keep good communication with all departments: Their feedback is key to detect skill gaps
and to understand the impact of trainings.
51
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Chapter 5: Performance management
Performance management is the systematic process of planning work and setting expectations,
continually monitoring performance, developing the capacity to perform, periodically rating
performance, rewarding good performance, and taking corrective measures when performance fails
to meet factory expectations.
1. The importance of Performance Management
Performance is crucial to achieve results in any organisation, including factories and IPs. To ensure
high performance in any business, it is necessary to develop a performance management system that
helps the organisation to align employees and resources with strategic objectives and to make
necessary adjustments to avoid or address problems. In particular, for factories that work in a highly
dynamic and competitive global supply chain system, the need for performance management is
critical, as they need to ensure effective performance not only to enhance their competitiveness in
the global market but also to meet the needs and expectations of international clients.
In addition, to boosting the competitiveness of the organisation, designing an effective performance
management system brings about countless benefits for the factory, as it:
+ Boosts company performance: Research shows that organisations that effectively use
performance management to develop the capabilities of individuals and teams significantly
outperform organisations that do not in areas such as revenue, net income and employment
(Corporate Leadership Council, 2002).2
+ Aligns team and individuals with the organisation: Performance systems provide a tool
to align competencies of individuals and teams to the strategic goals of the organisation.
+ Ensures workplace transparency and clarity: Through the performance management talks,
employees understand their role in their organisation, what is expected of them and know
how to achieve expected results.
+ Creates base for designing development strategies that advance the organisation:
Based on data collected through performance management, organisations can devise and
implement continuous improvement programs that further develop skills and expertise of
employees and teams.
+ Provides a deep understanding on what is affecting performance: Organisations
understand what factors are affecting performance in all dimensions of the factory and can
devise plans to address them.
3 Corporate Leadership Council (2002) Building the High-Performance Workforce A Quantitative Analysis of the
Effectiveness of Performance Management Strategies.
52
+ Provides critical data for supporting fact-based decision making: Important data can be
collected for informed, fact-based HR decision making (e. g. selection, training, promotion,
etc. ).
+ Helps to retain top talent: By systematically evaluating performance, performance
management enables the organisation to identify top talent and reward high performance,
which can greatly contribute to increasing employees happiness and, thereby, retention.
+ Enhances ownership and employee satisfaction: Performance management engages the
employees in dialogue, which helps develop the relationship with the employee. It also
enhances ownership by giving employees a say regarding their role in the company and the
alignment of their personal goals with organisational objectives.
As seen above, setting up a performance system to build a working culture based on high
performance can bring numerous benefits for factories. In the case of Ethiopia, in particular,
developing and implementing a performance system is highly relevant. As the industrial working
culture is still in the first stages and, therefore, most factory employees lack previous relevant work
experience, it is necessary that factories accompany and guide the development of the workforce to
help them achieve performance goals. This will require effort, time and commitment. However, such
an investment will yield positive results that can help factories tackle some of their most pressing
problems.
2. The Strategic Role of HR in Performance Management
As a general practice, it is the HR department who owns, leads and coordinates the performance
management system in the factories. It works together with department heads and provides advice
to them on staff performance management issues. Such advice can be provided in the following areas:
+ Understanding and executing the performance management process
+ Determining the activities that need to be performed in doing performance management
+ Using the performance management tools and templates
+ Dealing with issues or unusual situations that arise during the performance management
cycle
+ Helping to realise performance management improvement opportunities
+ Documenting performance records
The department heads are responsible in identifying Key Result Areas (KRAs), developing
metrics/measures, setting goals/targets and standards, and assigning weights for result and
competency expectations for Operators and Line Supervisors.
It should be noted, however, that a key foundation for the performance management approach is that
it is grounded in a culture that is supportive of the process and reinforces the actions and behaviours
it attempts to reward and recognise. This means that for performance management to yield positive
53
results, the factory has to work together: HR leads and coordinates the performance management
system and leaders in the factory not only support and adhere to the processes but also guide and
encourage all employees to be active participants in their own performance and career management
in the factory.
3. The Performance Management Process
To be effective, performance management in the factory needs to go through five major stages. These
are:
Stage 1
Factory goals
+ planning NY
Stage 5 Stage 2
Performance Individual
intervention Stages of performance
performance plan
managment
Stage 4 Stage 3
Performance Managing +
reviews coaching
3.1. Stage 1: Factory Goals and Planning
In order to be able to reach their objectives, factories need to cascade them into measurable elements
appropriately to each of their departments. This process is usually done by the top management and
the board through an annual goal cascading process that starts off the annual performance
management cycle for each fiscal year. Top level goals can include items such as customer satisfaction,
product variety, quality, profitability, lead times, etc. The factory goals should be deconstructed and
translated across the factory top management to all departments and levels.
With cascading and aligning goals, employees can understand:
+ Exactly what the factory is focused on
+ How their work contributes to the achievement of factory goals
54
+ The overall department/ team impact to the performance of the factory
Once the factory goals are communicated, each department should establish and outline their own
objectives aligned to the factory goals. This process is led by the department managers with the help
of the HR department and it involves:
+ Understanding factory goals and the department's role in them
+ Setting performance goals at the department level
+ Defining the department's KPIs (Key Performance Indicators) and establish targets
+ Communicate goals and KPIs to the department's employees
Key Performance Indicator (KPI: is a measurable value that demonstrates how effectively a
company is achieving their objectives in order to evaluate their success at reaching targets.
A SMART KPI is one that is:
= Specific
= Measurable
= Attainable
= Relevant
= Time-framed
3.2. Stage 2: Individual Performance Plan
Once department goals are identified and clarified, the process of cascading moves further to every
employee of the factory: each individual position should be assigned objectives and tasks that are
aligned with the department goals.
Preparing the individual performance plan will have the following outcomes:
+ Coming to agreement on the individual's key job responsibilities- the key aspects of the job to
which attention have to be given.
+ Developing a common understanding of the objectives that need to be achieved.
+ Identifying important competencies that the individual must display in doing the job.
+ Creating an appropriate individual development plan.
+ Entering a performance agreement between the employee and his/her supervisor or
manager.
This process is based on the factory and department goals and job descriptions (which describe the
roles and responsibilities of all positions in the factory). All positions have to be aligned with the goals
of the department/ unit.
It should be noted that the individual management plan is a result of a joint effort of managers/supervisors
and employees, who define the goals included in the performance plan and assign weights or priorities. A
template for developing the individual management plan can be found in Annex | of this chapter.
55
3.2.1. Developing the Individual Management Plan
 Determining objectives: Managers and employees discuss and agree on the objectives of
their performance plan together. This entails jointly identifying which accomplishment(s} will
be included in the performance plan. For
When defining objectives and targets, it is
important to:
= Set objectives and targets that are
ambitious but realistic i. e. focused on
improving the factory performance while
being fair to the employees and aligned to
their knowledge, skills and possibilities.
= Actively involve the employee in the
process of defining objectives and targets.
example, for a sewing operator in a
garment factory, two objectives could be:
(1) becoming a multi-skill operator who
can work with single-needle machine and
over lock machine; and (2) to increase
their efficiency in single-needle machine
by 15% i. e. increase from 70 pieces/hour
to 80 pieces/hour. In the case of a staff
The set objectives and targets should not
only be understood but also consented by
the employee.
member such as Assistant in Payroll, the
objective could be to process pay checks
for all 60% of the employees without
error. Here it should be noted, however,
that some objectives may be more easily quantifiable but this depends on the position (e. g.
objectives for an HR Assistant may not be as easily quantifiable as the objectives of an
operator).
+ Allocating importance weights to the objectives: It might be that not all objectives are
equally important. For this reason, it is necessary to determine which objectives are the most
important and allocate weights reflecting the relative importance of the key objectives to each
other. For example, in the case of the sewing operator, the first goal -i. e. becoming a multi-
skill operator- might be more important than others if the factory has a shortage of over lock
operators.
+ Identify performance measures: Measures are the yardsticks used to determine the
performance of employees. Agreement should be reached on how performance will be
measured on each performance objective. Quantity, quality, timeliness, and/or cost-
effectiveness are usually important and applicable in factory work.
+ Determine targets: Once there is agreement on how the performance will be assessed,
targets should be defined to determine how successfully the objectives are completed. When
defining the targets, it is necessary to involve the employees actively. Industry or factory
standards can be used for setting a benchmark. For example, if average single-needle sewing
operation in the factory produces 80 pieces per hour and the employee with whom the plan
is being developed produces only 60 pieces per hour the supervisor can discuss with the
employee and find an agreement of what would be a target that is realistic and attainable but
still ambitious with them (e. g. 70 pieces per hour by the end of the quarter).
56
Competency planning: Manager/supervisors and worker/staff should identify the
prerequisite competencies required to effectively reach the objectives. The competencies
should be tailored to every position and may include both technical competencies and soft
skills. Some common competencies for most employees in the factory (both at worker and
management level) include collaboration, teamwork, communication, problem-solving, time
management, planning, leadership and decision making. Competencies also have to be
weighted in order of importance and measurements should be assigned to evaluate their
development. For example, for a worker, the competency of leadership would weigh less as
time management; in contrast, for a supervisor, leadership might be one of the most
important competencies.
Personal development plan: Once the objectives are set and the competencies necessary to
achieve those objectives identified, it is necessary to assess the existing competency level of
the employee. This will help the factory analyse what the employee's competency gaps are
and, based on that, develop a learning and developmental plan with the employee to close
those gaps. Priority should be given to the competencies that are needed to fulfil the individual
performance plan. The process of needs and goals assessment can be facilitated through the use
of the Individual Development Plan (IDP) form attached as Annex Il of this chapter.
Performance agreement or contract: To ensure that each employee is aware of the specific
contributions expected of him or her for a predetermined period linked to the performance
management cycle, a written contract must be established. Performance agreements form
the basis for development, assessment and feedback in the performance management
process. Once an employee's performance is defined in this way, it can serve as a living
document that the employee and its manager/ supervisor can use to monitor worker's
performance throughout the year and assess progress toward achieving his/her goals.
Documentation: A print out of the plan is sent to a reviewer (usually a next level manager)
for approval. If the reviewer demands revisions, he or she shall inform the individuals
concerned and agreements need to be reached. A copy of the plan is sent to HR within a
specified day (3 to 5 days are recommended) after the signature of the agreement.
Resolving differences: In case of disagreements between the supervisor and the employee
on any component of the plan, the next level manager may interfere to help the two reach a
consensus. If it is not possible to reach a consensus, then the case shall be taken to the next
upper level manager who makes the ultimate decision which will be binding and final.
Stage 3: Managing and Coaching
After the Individual Performance Management Plan has been developed, it is necessary to follow-up
and monitor regularly to understand how the implementation of the plan is going and to take
measures as necessary. In the follow-up it is necessary that all parties (i. e. managers, employees, HR,
factory leadership) have an active role.
57
For the Performance Management System to work, it should be an ongoing process throughout the
year to be monitored through on-going coaching and feedback across the performance period; not a
"once-a-year ritual".
Managers/Supervisors
In the follow-up, managers/supervisors need to:
Proactively provide year-round performance/development coaching and feedback, help
build and improve specific capabilities
. Co Coaching and giving feedback are skills that must be
and remove barriers to achieving
learned. Factories must ensure that every
objectives. employee in a position of leadership is trained in the
Take record of important events and communication skills needed to provide good
achievements of employees regularly feedback, listen actively and motivate their
as they happen. The records should subordinates to boost their performance
focus only on those employee
behaviours and actions relevant to the job and expectations that are included in the
performance plan. This can be done in a Performance Log whose template is attached in Annex lil.
Hold regular work-related discussions to talk about performance. This involves informal
conversation or notes, as well as more formal coaching meetings and written documentation.
In the discussions, indicate both where performance has been improved and where it still
needs to be improved. In the areas where performance has improved, recognise the
achievement and appreciate the effort and accomplishment of the employee.
Give balanced, constructive and ongoing feedback - both positive and negative -focused on
improving the worker's performance. On-going feedback saves the employees from
unpleasant surprises at the appraisal interview. Feedback should be given verbally and then
appropriately recorded in writing.
If performance expectations change throughout the year, redefine expectations and update
the goals and action plan to reflect the change.
Work hand by hand with their subordinates soliciting ideas and suggestions from the
employees for improving work processes, identifying barriers to success and strategies for
removing or minimising the barriers, and discussing their professional development needs.
Solicit worker feedback on supervisory coaching effectiveness.
Employees
In the follow-up, employees should be engaged. In specific, they need to:
Be actively involved in the definition of their own objectives.
Identify and discuss performance issues openly immediately with their supervisor.
Listen and respond to feedback.
58
+ Reflect on their own performance, competences and the challenges they face in their daily
work. It should be clear for all employees that they have an active role in improving their
own performance.
Ask their supervisors for coaching when they need it.
Human Resources department
The HR department needs to support the follow-up by:
+ Providing training and support to relevant staff to enable them to develop the performance
management plans, monitor and document them.
+ Facilitating the ongoing feedback and coaching.
 Acting as a bridge between the manager/supervisors and employees to improve
communication and guarantee that feedback is being given when needed.
+ Escalating any coaching and feedback problem areas to the next level manager (e. g. , poor
feedback on the quality of the coaching provided).
Factory Leadership (top management)
Factory leadership also has an important role in the whole process of performance management. For
the follow-up, they need to:
+ Provide support for managers and supervisors on providing effective coaching and feedback.
+ Monitor the practice of coaching.
Supervisors and managers in the factory should do a performance review periodically. It is suggested
to do it at least semi-annually. The aim of such review is to provide a clear view of how the employee
is progressing towards their goals and to offer an opportunity for corrective action. The review
involves the following activities:
+ The supervisor reviews and assesses the employee's performance according to the agreed
result and competency objectives.
+ The employee and supervisor conduct performance review meeting to discuss progress made
toward achieving goals as well as additional effort, support and/or resources needed.
 The supervisor provides a formal summary and record of the employee's performance for the
reporting period in relation to the performance objectives and targets agreed.
Rating performance
The performance of a worker on each performance objective/criterion can be rated as one of the five
rating categories as defined below:
59
Score Rating Definition
c Exceptional Performance is consistently superior and significantly exceeds
target/standard
Highly Effective | Performance consistently meets and often exceeds target/standard
Proficient Performance consistently meets target/standard
Inconsistent Performance is slightly below target/standard
Unsatisfactory | Performance consistently/significantly fails to meet minimum
Seli-appraisals
An option that factories can consider when their performance management system is already
advanced are self-appraisals. Self-appraisals are an important tool to promote ownership
among the workforce. They allow employees to make a self-reflection on their achievements,
difficulties and opportunities while performing their daily tasks. Moreover, itis a helpful tool for
the supervisor/manager to compare impressions and hold the discussion during the
performance appraisal. It is recommended to provide a self-appraisal form (see Annex IV) to the
employees right before their appraisal meeting, clarify the purpose of the form and give them
enough time to fill it in. It should be pointed out that employees may have a different perception
of their own performance than the impressions from the supervisor/manager and the available
data. Therefore, it is crucial that the manager is aware of these differences, can provide a fact-
based explanation to the employees for the differences in ratings where necessary and also be
ready to review his/her own assessment based on the discussion with the employee.
Review and approval
The completed performance appraisal form has to be reviewed with and approved by the next higher
level of management, dated, signed, and returned to the appraising supervisor. By signing the form,
this level of management indicates concurrence with the content of the form and any recommended
Signature
The performance appraisal form should be signed by all the parties involved i. e. employee,
supervisor/manager, next level manager. An employee's signature does not mean he/she agrees with
the evaluation results. It indicates that the worker and supervisor met to discuss the performance
review. If a worker refuses to put his/her signature, it is recommended that the supervisor notes the
employee's refusal on the form.
Deadline
A stipulated deadline has to be set for performance appraisals. Deadlines not being met should be
considered unacceptable performance by the supervisor/manager in charge and taken into account
in the assessment of his/her performance. In addition, supervisors/managers must complete the
60
evaluations of their employees they manage/supervise before their own is signed off by their
supervising managers.
Appeal procedure
If employees do not agree with their performance appraisal results and the issue can't be handled
through discussion with their immediate supervisors, they can appeal for reconsideration through the
following steps:
+ Report the case to the next level manager/supervisor in a written letter expressing their
complaints.
+ Within a few days of receipt of the letter, the skip-level manager/supervisor investigates the
causes of the conflict with both the affected employee and its supervisor/manager. Depending
on the matter, he or she may also advice both parties. If the complaint persists, the skip-level
manager/supervisor makes a final and binding decision.
3.5. Stage 5: Performance Interventions
The results of the performance appraisal should be the basis for rewards and corrective actions in the
Rewarding high-performing employees
During the appraisal process, top performers can be 11. iatention of top performers is of
identified. Supervisors/managers should notify the next qa importance in the factory and
level manager, who in consultation with top management they should be recognized and
will make the final selection of those entitled to a reward rewarded for their performance, based
and also determine the type of rewards. on objectives and competencies.
The reward can be granted either as a promotion, salary
increase, bonus (performance pay), or a combination of the them (depending on the particular
circumstances of each staff member). Recognition for performance is not always monetary and good
performance should be rewarded immediately, providing recognition {public or private) when it is
due.
Addressing unsatisfactory performance
Managing poor performance is an integral part of the factory performance management system. It
looks forward to what can be done by individuals to overcome performance problems and,
importantly, how managers and supervisors can provide support and help. Poor performance can be
addressed using the following procedures:
+ Formal poor performance counselling sessions: In these sessions, problems of poor
performance need to be identified and agreed on between the supervisors and employee.
These problems may include different reasons such as not receiving adequate support or
guidance, not fully understanding expectations, lack of ability/skills or unwillingness to
perform. Counselling is provided depending on the reasons discussed and employees are
61
made aware again of the potential consequences of not complying with performance
requirements.
+ Performance Improvement Plan (PIP): An improvement plan should be devised and agreed
on to assist the employee in achieving the required objectives and give a fair opportunity to
improve performance. The plan should indicate the performance problem, an action plan, a
target date and monitoring remarks. This plan should be specific and results-oriented with
measurable outcomes to be achieved within a reasonable time period.
+ On-going monitoring and support: Adequate instructions, coaching and training should be
provided to ensure that the employee is able to meet his/her objectives and targets.
+ Formal disciplinary measures: If performance does not improve, a series of graduated
disciplinary measures should be considered. The following is a guide to taking disciplinary
measures on the basis of unsatisfactory performance:
o If a worker obtained unsatisfactory performance for two consecutive review periods,
the worker will be given final warning in a formal letter of warning.
o If a worker failed to improve his/her performance and obtained unsatisfactory
performance for two consecutive review periods as a result of his/her
refusal/negligence to take the opportunity of training, counselling, guidance and
coaching prepared by the supervisor, the worker can be dismissed on grounds of
unfitness or incapacity to carry out his or her duties.
o If aworker obtained unsatisfactory performance for three consecutive review periods,
the worker is either demoted to a lower grade position or dismissed on grounds of
4. Performance Documentation
Documenting performance is necessary as it allows the factory to have records of the discussions held
regarding the performance of employees, what topics were included, what progress has been made
towards the goals in the performance plan, what issue arose and whether they were address and
how. Therefore, as already briefly mentioned above, throughout the performance period, record of
important events and achievements should be collected and kept by the supervisor/manager.
The supervisor/manager must determine what data to collect along with all the potential sources of
information to be assessed, including, colleagues, employees, periodic written reports, productivity records,
incidents and observable employee behaviour. Some ideas of what to document are presented below:
+ Discussions held with the employee regarding their performance. It is necessary to document
exactly what the employee did and said and what the supervisor/manager did and said in
response.
62
+ Both positive contributions/improvements/achievements and failures in performance
(including reasons for failure both from employee perspective, management perspective) with
corresponding supporting examples and data.
+ Any agreements made during the discussions/conversations, including goals set, corrective
actions discussed and agreed upon, timeline for improvements.
Records related to performance should be maintained regularly as they happen in, for example, the
Performance Log (a template is available in Annex ll of this chapter). In the case of negative feedback, it
is particularly important that supervisors and managers make efforts to express observations as
neutral facts rather than judgements and support these observations as much as possible with
specific examples and data. This will make the observations more accurate and evidence-founded,
which will contribute to having more accurate performance assessments.
In addition, to regular maintenance of the performance documentation, it is important to ensure that
all participants in the performance review process sign relevant documents.
The completed performance planning and review form for each staff member is part of his/her official
personnel file. Copies of the final form will be distributed to the employee; supervisor/manager and
attached to the staff member's personal file by HR Department.
5. Implementation and enforcement of Performance
Management
 Ensure that HR trains, coaches and supports all departments while they develop their
performance plans. The role of HR is especially important in the first stages of introducing a
performance management system in the factory.
 Set up clear timelines and deadlines for the development of the performance plan and
performance appraisals.
+ Ensure that employees are always actively involved in the process of defining their performance
objectives and targets. This is a crucial basis for all the process that will help prevent conflicts,
promote transparency and create an overall sense of fairness while increasing employee's
sense of responsibility and ownership.
+ When defining performance objectives and targets keep them real and achievable. Setting
unrealistic goals can create a great deal of frustration and unhappiness in the employee and,
as a result, negatively impact their motivation.
+ If there are major changes in the organisation, job objectives can be amended (after approval
of all involved parties) to respond to those changes.
+ Address problems with low performers but do not forget about high performers. They are the
ones who contribute the most to the factory goals and also the ones more likely to be wooed
away by competitors. Managers and supervisors must spend time talking with high
performers about their goals and how the can the factory help achieve them.
63
Integrate performance management into daily work. Performance management is an ongoing
process and the best performance managers constantly solicit, give, and receive feedback.
Do not forget to train and coach supervisors and team leaders i. e. anyone in charge of the
performance management of others, in communication skills. This will help to prevent
conflicts, ensure that feedback is given on time, increase confidence and improve the work
atmosphere.
Always link promotion to performance. Beware of the fact that many supervisors do not want
to let go of their best workers, and therefore, may not give them the chance to grow in the
factory. Ultimately, this leads to demotivation, lower performance and leaving the factory.
Good performance management systems in place prevent this from happening.
Remember that performance management is a skill that takes time to build and refine.
However, the results brought about by a well-implemented performance management system
are more than worth the effort.
The activities, primary responsibilities, sign-off requirements and the supporting tools and templates
employed in the above five stages of performance management process is summarised in the
following table.
# | Activity Primary responsible Supporting tools and Sign-off
party(ies) templates requirements
11cC de fact ,
ascage factory o Top Management o Not Required
goals and plans
2 . o Immediate
o Immediate individual
supervisor ) Performance Plan Supervisor
Prepare Individual |  Employee o Reviewer (Next-
. Template (Annex I)
performance plan | o Reviewer (Next-level level manager)
manager) o Development Plan
& Template (Annex Ii)  Employee
o HR unit
3 Ongoing coaching c Immediate o Performance Log )
supervisor o Not required
& feedback Template (Annex Ili)
o Worker
  Immediate Performance Lo . immediate
supervisor N & supervisor
Performance ; Template (Annex IV) .
) o (Reviewer) Next-level o Reviewer (Next-
review o Self-appraisal Form
manager level manager)
(Annex IV)
 Employee o Employee
5 | Performance )
intervention o Top Management o Not required o Top Management
64
Annex I: Performance Planning and Review Form
This performance planning and review form is divided into 3 sections. Please use the guidelines as
described below in completing the form.
Section I: Result Objectives
Objective: Write an objective statement consistent with the SMART model: Specific;
Measurable; Attainable; Relevant; Time-framed.
Weight/Priority: Enter the importance/priority weight.
Metrics and Milestones: Identify agreed upon measures and milestones that will define
successful performance.
Target Level: Original score: Please enter the employee's target performance score on the
original measurement scale (e. g. in hours, number etc. ) for the quarter of the year.
Actual Level: Original score: Please enter the employee's actual performance score on the
original measurement scale (e. g. in hours, number etc. )
Rating: please enter the appropriate rating (1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5) considering the achievement
on the original score and the rating scales and standards defined. The ratings are defined as
follows
o Exceptional (5): Exceeded all expectations, measures, targets for the objective.
o Highly effective (4): Exceeded most expectations, measures, targets for the objective.
o Proficient (3): Meet all expectations, measures, targets for the objective.
o Inconsistent (2): Met most but not all expectations, measures, targets for the
objective.
o Unsatisfactory (1): Failed to meet expectations, measures, and targets for the
Space is provided for the supervisor to provide comments and examples to support the rating.
Name of employee: Employee ID:
Job Title:
Work unit:
Supervisor: Performance Period:
Next Level Manager:
Performance on Result Objectives
Result Objective 1: Weight Aligns to ... Metrics and
Milestones
Review period st Quarter 2" Quarter 3d Quarter 4 Quarter
Target Level
Actual Level
65
Rating
Result Objective 2: Weight Aligns to ... Metrics and
Observations & Comments (Optional):
(Add objectives as required)
RATINGS SUMMARY - by Result Objective
Weight x Weight x | Weight x Rate | Weight x
Rate Rate Rate
Weight x Weight x [Weight x Rate | Weight x
E. g. Result objective total of all weights can be = 60%.
+ In this section the supervisor identifies relevant sets of core, technical and managerial
competencies required of the employee according to their grades and in accordance with the
competency framework (if any) of the factory.
+ The proficiency level of each competency shall be inserted in the form drawn from the
competency framework.
+ Each competency objective shall be rated using the standard scale as provided in this manual.
66
Competency Objectives
Competency 1: Weight:
Review period 1st Quarter 2" Quarter Bd Quarter 4h Quarter
Weighted score
Competency 2: Weight:
E. g. Competency total of all weights can be = 40%.
Section Ill - Overall Rating
Use this space to describe the overall performance rating for the review period incorporating both
result objectives and competencies.
Overall Performance Rating
Results objective Competency (Weighted Overall Score
(Weighted Score) Score)
Quarter 1
Quarter 2
Quarter 3
Quarter 4
Annual Average
Section IV - Overall Performance Appraisal Summary
+ Supervisor/Manager comments- A section is also provided for the supervisor to comment and
explain the overall rating given to the employee. For an overall rating of exceptional or
unsatisfactory, the supervisor must provide expanded information why the employ warrants
the highest or lower score in our performance rating system. This information should be
detailed.
67
+ Employee Comments - All employees have the right to add comments concerning their annual
reviews. Such comments may include acknowledgement or disagreements with the
performance ratings given by the supervisor. Prior to affixing signatures, the supervisor
should ask the worker if they wish to add comments.
+ Signatures - In this final section, space is provided for three signatures: the employee, the
supervisor who conducted the performance review meeting and the next level supervisor or
administrator charged to sign off on the performance review. An employee's signature does
not mean they agree with the evaluation results. It indicates that the employee and supervisor
met to discuss the performance review.
+ Distribution of the Form - Once all signatures have been affixed, distribute copies to the
worker, the supervisor and HR function.
Overall Performance Appraisal Summary
Comments
Supervisor Summary Comments:
Write quarterly or year-end
Employee Comments (if any) from Feedback/ Review Discussion:
Manager Summary Comments:
Signatures
Performance objective
Quarterly/ Annual Review
agreement
Signature |Date| Quarter 1 Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4
Sign. Date | Sign. Date | Sign. Date | Sign. Date
Employee
Supervisor
Next level
Manager
68
Annex Il: Individual Development Plan Form
Name of employee: Job Position:
Work unit: Supervisor:
Employee ID:
Performance period:
Identify critical development activities for the upcoming year that the employee will participate in
to improve his/her performance and behaviour.
Development Activity Description | Hours Date Place Success Indicator
Signatories
Employee Name Signature Date
Supervisor Name Signature Date
69
Annex Ill: Performance Log
Performance Log Sheet
Name of Employee: Job Position:
Date
Event
description
Remark (Positive, Negative or Can't Say)
70
Annex IV: Self-appraisal Form
Objectives Result
Please list the result objectives set in your performance plan for the performance period, and
evaluate your achievement/performance on each objective on the following scale:
Score | Rating Definition
) Performance is consistently superior and significantly exceeds
5 Exceptional
Highly )
4 i Performance consistently meets and often exceeds target/standard
Effective
) Performance consistently/significantly fails to meet minimum
1 Unsatisfactory
Result Self-evaluation Comment
Objectives 15tQ 2M Q 34 Q 4h Q
Write your evaluation of your own overall achievement of the result objectives for the period:
Competencies
Please list the relevant competencies for your position from the Competency Framework of the Factory, and
assess yourself on each of them on the following scale: Outstanding, Fully Competent, Needs Improvement,
or unsatisfactory.
Competencies Self-evaluation Comment
14Q 2%Q 3Q 4 Q
Write your evaluation of your own overall achievement of the competence objectives for the period:
Expectations
What are your expectations for the next appraisal period?
What can your supervisor do to help you achieve your future result and competence objectives?
What are your plans for the next appraisal? Please be clear and concise.
Signature:
71
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Chapter 6: Compensation
Defined in its broadest sense, compensation is any reward or payment given to a worker for services
performed. It includes wages, salaries, commissions and bonuses, plus insurance and other types of
indirect monetary benefits.
Compensation is a basis for worker satisfaction and therefore will play a great role in retention, motivation,
productivity, a harmonious working space, and everything that relates to the success of a factory, an
industrial park and generally speaking a countrys economy. When workers compensation cannot cover
living expenses and pay bills, dissatisfaction and hence absenteeism and turnover will be the
necessary result. Dealing with the cause is better than the symptom for sustainable effect.
1. The central role of compensation
Salary and wages are the main potential conflict area for any factory that wants to start and continue
operations in Ethiopia, as in every other country. Not only is it relevant to workers and factories, but
for the entire international community.
The reason is simple, without compensation that covers basic needs, workers won't have access to
the quantity or quality of food they need, a safe shelter where they can rest, buy the goods required
for a decent standard of living (clothes, hygienic products, medicines, etc. ). This will necessarily end
up in bad performance in the factory, demotivation, absenteeism, high turnover and conflict.
The Maslow Only the fulfilment
hierarchy of needs of the most basic
(1943) explains ones {physiological
how motivation is + safety needs) Self -actualization reaching
the result of a through access to one's full potential
person's attempt adequate food,
at fulfilling five shelter, clothing,
basic needs, in sleep, personal and
order: financial security
physiological, are a prerequisite
safety, social, to achieve higher _
esteem and self- levels of satisfaction Belonging and love needs
actualization. and motivation. relationships
Physiological needs food,
water, shelter and rest
72
However, to increase the salary does not automatically solve the workers challenges. Factors such as
weak financial management from the side of the workers, peer pressure to share the wages they get,
inflation rates especially in areas near Industrial Parks might end up making salary increments
meaningless. The focus therefore should not only be on setting up higher salaries, but on taking a
holistic approach to provide benefits that improve the workers living conditions.
Setting up a competitive compensation scheme will help factories to:
+ Attract a sufficient number of qualified workers to fill factory positions
+ Increase worker satisfaction and ownership
 Retain workers and decrease turnover rates
+ Motivate workers to perform to the fullest extent of their capabilities
+ Improve the positive image of the company among workers and the community
This chapter focuses on two aspects of compensation:
1) How to set up competitive salaries
2) How to provide benefits that increase the overall well-being of workers
Living wages
A living wage is the minimum income necessary for a worker to meet the basic needs of
himself/herself and his/her family, including some discretionary income. This should be earned
during legal working hour limits (i. e. without overtime). Agreement on a living wage should be
reached through good-faith negotiations between the employer, employees and their legitimate
representatives, preferably through collective bargaining at both industry and national levels.
2. Setting up a competitive salary
A pay structure has to enable factories to successfully compete in the labour market and be able to
attract, motivate and retain required workforce by ensuring the right balance between internal equity,
providing equitable and consistent reward on the basis of each individual's performance and
responsibilities, and the market rate. Setting a fair pay structure which is equitable internally and
against competitors is a critical issue in encouraging the performance and stability of the workforce
in the factory. Factories guiding principles in developing salary structure should be the following:
Equal compensation for equal work. This does not affect distinctions made based on factors
such as qualifications and experience.
+ Compensation must be comparable to the one offered by other factories inside the park and
other companies in the surrounding areas.
+ Salaries should consider any loss of purchasing power due to changes in the market factors
e. g. inflation.
73
+ The salary structure should properly reflect differences in responsibilities, complexity and
workload for each position.
+ Performance improvement should be driven through performance-linked incentives (variable
pay)
ILO Safeguards on Wages
o Adequacy of wage: The minimum wage paid {whether a fixed wage or piece rate) should be
adequate to meet the needs of workers and their families, taking into account, as far as
possible and appropriate in relation to national practice and conditions:
= the general level of wages in the country, the cost of living, social security benefits, and
the relative living standards of other social groups;
= economic factors, including the requirements of economic development, levels of
productivity and the desirability of attaining and maintaining a high level of employment;
= changes in the cost of living and other economic conditions.
o Paymentin legal tender, made directly to the worker: Wages payable in money should be paid
only in legal tender and paid directly to the worker. Payment should not be made in the form
of promissory notes, vouchers or coupons. Workers must be free to dispose of their earnings
as they choose, although voluntary thrift may be encouraged. If permitted by national laws or
regulations, collective agreements or arbitration awards, wages may be partially paid in the
form of allowances in kind where payment in the form of such allowances is customary or
desirable, provided that they are appropriate and beneficial. The value of any payment in kind
should be assessed at reasonable market prices.
o Transparency of payment calculation: Payments should be transparent, showing clearly the
gross wages, any deductions taken and for what purpose, and net wages due. Deductions
from wages should occur only if prescribed by national laws or regulations or fixed by
collective agreement or arbitration award. Deductions for loss or damage to goods should be
made only in cases where it has been proven that the worker is responsible. Workers should
be informed in writing of any deductions made. No deductions should be made for the
purpose of obtaining or retaining employment, paid either to the employer or an
intermediary.
o Regularity of payment: Wages should be paid regularly. Upon the termination of a contract
of employment, the worker should be paid a final settlement of all wages due within a
reasonable period of time having regard to the terms of the contract.
o Equal pay for work of equal value: Rates of remuneration should ensure equal remuneration
for men and women workers for work of equal value.
o Limits and conditions for deductions for provision of commodities or services by the
undertaking: Any commodities sold or services provided by the undertaking should be
provided at a reasonable price. Stores established and services operated by the employer
should not be operated for the purpose of securing a profit but for the benefit of the workers
concerned. There should be no coercion involved in the purchase of goods or services. *
4 Source: https: //www. ilo. org/empent/areas/business-helpdesk/fags/WCMS_DOC_ENT_HLP_WAG_FAQ_EN/lang--
en/index. htm
74
Setting up a competitive salary scale involves 3 major stages:
2.1. Stage 1- Job analysis and grading
This process involves analysing and describing every position in the factory to then rank and grade
them as a basis for remuneration structuring. The aim of this stage is to:
+ Identify and eliminate salary inequities and create a fair and equitable salary structure;
+ Provide an accurate way of measuring existing, new and/or modified jobs;
+ Develop and implement a consistent practice to regulate job grading; and
+ Ensure that job descriptions are consistent with job evaluation factors.
In doing this, it is advisable to consider factors such as complexity, knowledge and skill requirements,
and workload of the position.
All employees should be set in the corresponding grade as soon as they start working in the factory.
The upgrade to a higher position should be in line with performance, acquisition of new responsibilities,
skills or knowledge.
A worker promoted to a position of higher responsibility will be entitled to a salary increase
appropriate to the salary scale level for the new grade into which they are promoted.
2.2. Stage 2 - Setting a competitive salary scale
After developing an appropriate job grade structure, the next step is setting up a competitive salary.
Key steps to be considered are:
+ Review and understand the current factory pay scale (if no pay scale has been developed yet,
develop a plan to do so)
+ Analyse the relation between the factory's current salary scales and those of the competitors
+ Establish a system to continuously monitor the living costs in the area
+ Set a factory pay policy for revised or new salary scale design. The policy should answer how
the factory wants to position itself against the market or competitors
+ Develop incentive schemes for critical job families.
Setting up salary scales can be done as
a joint effort of all the factories in the
industrial park, provided that their
+ Strict market matching: In this approach, the only manufacturing processes are similar. In
relevant decision required is the desired market
positioning that would enable the factory to remain
competitive in the job market, therefore, salaries are
set by evaluating market pay levels. The desired
positioning with regards to competitors can be the
same for all grades and positions or differentiated by
position (e. g. higher than market values for more
critical positions and market average for other positions). This method requires a significant
There are two common approaches that factories can use to
design their salary structure:
particular, they could set up a park
system to monitoring living costs in the
area, and agree on a joint basic
increment procedure e. g. annual wage
increase to balance local inflation.
75
2.3.
accuracy of market data and constant monitoring of market salary changes. Moreover, this
approach provides a less structured way to managing careers, promotions and salary
increases which are key to promote motivation, performance and satisfaction in the
workforce.
Predefined parameters: The second approach, which is common and fairly reasonable in the
Ethiopian market context, is to use predefined parameters that will govern the design of the
salary structure. Like the first approach, this approach also starts with a desired market
positioning relative to selected market competitors. However, the market positioning
consideration is only one of the design factors in this approach, among many others. To
ensure equity and transparency, this approach defines appropriate salary differentials and
salary ranges for the new salary scale. The advantage of this approach is that it provides a
structure for promotions and career development in the factory.
Stage 3: Salary administration based on the Labour
Proclamation
Workers salary may be adjusted annually based on the performance/profit of the factory. In Ethiopia,
wage is
Deducti
protected against deductions, attachment, and set-off by the employer.
ons are only exceptionally allowed in the case of: authorisation by law e. g. for tax purposes,
court order, collective agreement (if any) or work rules, or when there is a written agreement of the
worker.
Payroll deductions: A factory is required to withhold statutory deductions and relevant taxes
from each worker's gross salary. In addition, deductions will be made from a worker's salary
for benefits such as pension contributions and advances (see below). Workers should
complete the necessary paperwork authorising the HR Department for these deductions
either when they start working at the factory or when the deduction will occur i. e. in the case
of deductions for salary advances. All changes to the payroll must be done in writing through
a pay change advice.
Salary advances: A salary advance may be granted to a worker owing to unforeseen
circumstances which place him/her in a difficult financial position requiring assistance from
the factory. All salaried workers are eligible for salary advance approved by the HR Manager
subject to:
o Aworker not having any major previous salary advance or disciplinary case.
o The recovery of the advance has to be made within twelve months and within the
contract period.
o Workers are expected to ensure that they comply with the one third (1/3) rule: their total
deductions cannot exceed two thirds (2/3) of their basic salary.
Overtime Payment: Following the labour proclamation, the rate of overtime payment varies
according to the dates and times in which the overtime is made:
76
Time of work Amount to be paid
Day time or evening work 1.25 x hourly wage rate
Night work 1.5 x hourly wage rate
Work on Rest day 2.0 x hourly wage rate
Work on Holiday 2.5 x hourly wage rate
The Ethiopian labour proclamation also states that:
Overtime can only be done on compelling grounds: accident, force majeure, urgent work and
substitution of absent workers;
Expressed instructions for overtime work from the factory are required (workers cannot just
spontaneously work overtime);
The maximum number of overtime hours permitted by law is limited to 2 hours per day, 20
hours per month and 100 hours in a year.
3. Workers Benefits
A benefit is any financial instrument except basic salary that accrues to a worker by virtue of his/her
employment and/or rank in the factory. Specific benefits are stipulated in contracts and collective
agreement (if existing). The benefits that are applicable in a factory are:
Pension Fund (mandatory, as per Ethiopian Labour Proclamation)
Rest Period and Leave. (mandatory, as per Ethiopian Labour Proclamation). Because of the
special nature of leave, it is described in detail in the next chapter.
Provident Fund
Medical benefit
Allowances such as transport, housing, food, and other allowances depending on the industry
and position.
Incentive schemes such as attendance and performance bonus
Medical Benefits
The medical benefit scheme can provide different types of medical coverage and/or attention:
May cover inpatient, outpatient, and maternity expenses;
Should specify ailments or conditions to be covered; and
Should define the limits of entitlement for inpatient, outpatient and maternity expenses.
Should state the ceiling amount for medical coverage in terms of ETB.
A factory can cover medical expenses based on refund of actual expenses, in their own facilities in
case they have a clinic or through a company contracted medical service provider (on-site clinics,
contracted /outsourced private clinics or referral hospitals, for more serious cases).
77
Pension Scheme
Workers who have completed the probation period of 45 days are eligible for the factory's pension
scheme in line with what is stated in the Social Security Proclamation for private workers in Ethiopia.
+ Registration: Companies shall submit to the government authorities copies of its
establishment law, personal data of its employee taken at the time of first employment, letter
of employment issued to the employee and other particulars.
+ The time limit for submission of data: the registration shall be made within 60 days from
the date of establishment or employment.
Allowances
Allowances can be a major component of the total compensation package. In order to guarantee
workers physiological wellbeing and safety, it is recommended that these allowances are provided in
kind. As stated before, allowances paid in cash might end up being used for other urgent matters,
being shared with the family, or being insufficient to cover rising prices in the IP area. The factory
should provide the allowances listed below.
e Transport Allowance: Providing transport allowance or service has a significant positive
impact on the performance of workers by reducing tardiness and absenteeism and making
workers safe. Factories are strongly advised to provide the transport allowance in kind.
Centralising the IP's transport services can be an option for all the factories in the IP.
e Food Allowance: Workers nutrition has a direct impact on the level of their productivity and
motivation. Therefore, providing food allowance enhances (and in many occasions enable)
workers productivity. To this end, factories are highly recommended to provide at least one
meal per shift to workers, either in their own canteens or organising a park centralised meal
service.
e House Allowance: The establishment of an industrial park requires thousands of workers to
move to an area. As a result, housing prices increase, making it very hard for workers to have
access to decent housing. This is a major contributor to turnover, tardiness, and low
productivity. To this end, it is advisable that factories consider this and work out solutions to
this problem. Although a housing allowance paid in cash could help the workers to have access
to better housing, this can just further contribute to the speculation and rising prices of rent.
It is recommended that the IP and/or factories provides housing for the workers which would
have a very positive impact on retention and on workers safety and living conditions.
4. Incentive schemes
Incentive schemes don't have to be used to reward people only for doing their job as expected by
their contracts. Bonuses are meant to reward employees for performing beyond the expected or
planned.
Some of the aspects to be rewarded can be:
78
+ Loyalty: when a worker with good performance stays in the factory over a time period (the
benchmark must be defined by the factory)
 Skills: when a worker can perform several different tasks.
+ Performance: producing more than planned by individual effort and/or teamwork.
+ Attendance: unblemished attendance over a period of time
Whereas factories are encouraged to develop schemes that reward loyalty and skill development,
attendance and performance should be included in the compensation from the beginning. They help
to promote a working culture in which responsibility, performance and motivation are considered of
high value and therefore rewarded. In the context of Ethiopia, where industrial culture is only starting
and many workers are experiencing the pace and requirements of manufacturing for the first time,
the bonuses can be of great help.
A Bonus schemes zre not a magic cure for low performance, nor are they an alternative to good
overall practices. Low productivity can be a result of a combination of reasons that also need to
be addressed to improve performance, including communication and leadership issues, lack of
training and skills, a negative working environment, etc. If the roots of low performance are not
addressed, incentives for themselves will not have the expected results.
4.1. Attendance
For the attendance bonus, factories should set up a minimum standard for acceptable levels of
absenteeism. Based on the standard, those who qualified for it have to receive the reward at the end
of the month.
Factories are recommended to set up their attendance incentive from early on, as this is a common
practice in Ethiopia.
It is important to create a clear and transparent structure for the computation of the attendance
bonus, and to have a good communication strategy towards the workforce. Based on the current
practice the following attendance bonus is recommended for operators in the factory.
Factories should follow their own criteria to define the amount of payment and how will it be done.
Both authorized and unauthorized absences are counted as an absence for attendance bonus.
4.2. Performance bonus
There are various ways of setting up performance incentive schemes, but all of them require that the
factories are clear about their performance of goals indicators. In order to define and set up a
performance bonus/ incentive, the factories can follow the next steps:
4.2.1. Step 1: Identifying job families
79
A factory has to identify those critical work segments or job families that are eligible for performance
bonuses. A simple table like the one below can help to identify eligible job families.
Officer
Operator
Not everyone in the factory needs to be entitled for a performance bonus. The job families that are
most relevant for the achievement of the factory objectives should be prioritised.
4.2.2. Step 2: Designing a performance incentive framework
The factory needs to consider a number of dimensions in designing a performance bonus framework.
The most important dimensions are summarised below.
Which worker categories should
be eligible for the programme?
All workers, supervisors, managers, middle
managers, operators, etc. (if applicable)
What should be the relative
share of the bonus out of the
total pay or relative to annual
base pay?
Percentage of variable pay out of total pay
e. g. 8to 10 % of total pay.
What format should the plan
have?
Commission, Bonus, Matrix/Pool e. g.
commission based on quantity of production
relative to a certain daily or weekly standard.
What performance measures
should be used? How can
individual and group
performance be incorporated?
Results vs. effort, Individual vs. group,
absolute vs. relative to goal vs. relative to past
performance e. g. highly interdependent roles
and hence pay should be based on both
individual and team performance
How frequently should the
bonus be paid?
Annual /semi-annual/ quarterly/ monthly/
weekly. e. g. monthly paid with salary
How should the pay-out rate
vary with level of performance?
Progressive, linear, regressive, mixed. E. g.
pay starts only when a certain level of
production quantity achieved, otherwise
zero. Pay depends on personal and team
performance.
80
The choice of a particular option in any dimension of a variable pay programme depends on
consideration of different factors such as:
+ Extent to which collaboration is needed in the factory.
 Extent to which an individual control the outcome of his/her action/decision.
+ The sophistication of the HR and production
function in the factory to administer the
performance bonus programme.
Factories can consider to pay the
performance bonus separately from
the salary. This can help the workers
e The need for ease of communication and understand that this is not part of their
understanding of the programme. base salary but an award that they
+ Precision of forecasts and plans - including receive depending on their
targets. performance. Factories that have
already implemented this method have
+ The impact of factory-wide factors in enhancing ;
proved to achieve better results.
+ Nature of positions - some positions are relatively
more critical in driving factory performance (e. g. , operators, IE, etc. ) and play a key role in
driving the growth and productivity. Those could be entitled to a higher bonus. This helps to
motivate these positions even more, as their role in fulfilling the objectives of the factory is
recognised.
+ Control on outcomes - positions that have greater control on the results of their actions and
decisions (e. g. production) may be entitled to more variable pay in their compensation.
+ Ease of measurement - positions for which accurate measurement of results produced by
actions and decisions of position holders is easier (e. g. production) may a higher variable pay
component in their total compensation.
Annex | of this chapter provides a template that factories can use to develop a performance incentive for a
selected job family.
5. Communication of salary and benefits
Salary payment tends to be the main source of grievances in factories. This is in many cases not a
consequence of the payment itself, but of bad communication and misunderstandings. Therefore,
factories have to invest time and effort in making sure that there is a good understanding of the
compensation and how it is calculated.
Clarity on the salary calculations has to be guaranteed from the beginning. During the onboarding
period, this topic must be included, focusing on the differentiation of their wages, allowances and
incentives and their calculation.
Workers have to receive their payslips monthly. Payslips must be written in a language that is
understood by all the workers. If this is not possible, translations of the payslips should be easily
accessible e. g. in posters on the production floor, outside HR office, entrance/exit, employee
handbook. Payslips should never be written in a foreign language.
81
The knowledge provided during onboarding has to be reinforced after the workers start receiving
their payments, so as to prevent feelings of unfairness and confusion about the salary, reinforce the
importance of performance and attendance and how it reflects in their compensation, and
guaranteeing that workers are aware of the benefits that the factory provides. Participatory trainings
with role play, group works, presentation of cases for workers to analyse and understand are the most
helpful. Classic classroom-style trainings that consist only of presentations are not as effective. More
information on training methods for adult learning can be found in Chapter 4, Training and development.
Communication on salary and benefits is crucial to prevent misunderstandings and conflicts in the
factory. Factories are recommended to Implement all of the following measures:
= Include salary, benefits and incentives as a part of induction/orientation and reinforce the
knowledge afterwards with participatory trainings
= Issue salary/ pay slips monthly that can be understood by the workers i. e. in their own
language
= Include salary, benefits and incentive calculations as part of the employee handbook
= Visual communication in the production floors using posters explaining the pay slip.
= Prepare supervisors to be experts in all issues regarding compensation and how to
communicate them to workers
@ Develop strategies for the HR department to be prepared to answer more questions/
grievances after payday.
In addition to the trainings, the salary calculations and details on the payslip should be included in the
employee handbook and should be visually communicated on the factory floors with posters, so that
workers can check them whenever they are in doubt.
Supervisors, who are in charge of managing workers and are the first to be asked about salary issues,
should be experts in explaining all the components of the salary to workers, along with labour law
issues regarding salary payment. Factories should give intensive training to supervisors on this topic.
Finally, the HR departments should be ready to get questions and grievances from the workers during
or immediately after the payday (even if these will not be as high if all the recommended measures
are implemented). Different strategies can be implemented to ease the job of HR and prevent
conflicts, such as offering a review session before the payday to workers, assigning a designated
person to ask supervisors if any doubts have been raised after the payment, etc.
82
Annex I: Setting up the performance incentive
The following template can be used by factories as a tool to develop an incentive scheme for a selected
job family. To facilitate the reading, production operations is used as an example.
This scheme is prepared for a job family in which both personal and team performance are critical
and interdependent. Hence, a matrix plan is proposed in which the pay-out rate depends both on
individual and team performance.
Components of the matrix
Individual performance. The rows represent an individual's performance as measured by the
weighted average of the person's achievement on key performance indicators for his or her
position. A person's personal performance is measured relative to the target, where 100%
represents full achievement of target. Note here that for any individual with more than one
personal performance indicator, a weighted average of all personal performance indicators
should be used. For details about the setting up of performance indicators, refer to Chapter 5,
Performance management.
Team performance. The columns represent team performance as measured by the
achievement of team production targets.
Definition of total payment: the combination of team and individual performance will define
the final value of the performance bonus that the employee will earn, based on a percentage
of their basic salary. This value is to be determined by the factories and can be found in the
cells of the matrix.
83
Production Operations
Matrix plan with performance bonus calculation based on both personal and team performance
24% to 30% of total payment is expected on average.
Outstanding cases will go up to 42%
[80% - 90%) | [90% - 100%) | [100%
110%)
<80% | O 0 0 0 0
[80% -]0 12 15 18 21
90%)
[90% - | 6 21 24 27 30
100%)
[100% | 12 27 30 33 36
>110% | 18 33 36 39 42
Note: Both personal and team performance should be evaluated depending on targets. The
numbers are provided arbitrarily for the sake of example.
Pay-out is calculated by multiplying the appropriate pay-out percentage with monthly gross salary-
Pay-out rates specified in the matrix represent pay-out as a percentage of the monthly gross salary.
The figure can be changed into payment per unit by converting performance goal percentage into
number of units produced and dividing the amount of variable pay by the quantity of units
produced above the target level.
The matrix is defined relative to individual target (row) vs. team target (column) percentage
achieved.
Based on performance target level set (both individually and as a team)
x
Please note: Based on the example above, the following general features of the incentive scheme are
to be noted:
+ The numbers at the intersection of the rows and columns are percentages of incentive
payments relative to a positions gross salary for the period. In the proposed plan, the
incentive pay-out rate is zero if either the actual team performance is less than 80 percent of
the target or if the actual achievement of the individual target on his or her own KPIs is 80
percent or less than 80 percent of the target.
+ If both the actual team and individual performances are above 80 percent of reference (target
performance), a worker will earn a certain percentage of his or her gross salary for the period
as incentive. However, the percentage of the pay-out depends on the particular configuration
of the actual team and individual performance. For instance, if an Operator achieves 90-100
percent of target and the team also achieves 90-100 percent of target the Operator earns 8%
of (depending on timing of pay-out) gross salary as an incentive pay. For a second example, if
actual team performance is within 100-110 percent of target and if worker's Individual
performance is within 80 to 90 range, an Operator receives only 6% of gross salary as
incentive. The same procedure applies for the remaining combination of Individual and team
performance levels. The procedure is just to locate the percent applicable for the Individual
and the team performance ranges and apply that percent to the worker's gross salary or
convert it into per unit of production pay.
 For a given level of team performance, the incentive pay rate increases as worker's
performance on his or her own individual performance increases.
+ For a given level of individual performance, the pay rate increases as the actual team
performance increases. Nonetheless, at any one cell in the matrix, a worker will hit a better
incentive rate by moving down to the immediate next cell in the same column rather than
moving right to the immediate next cell in the same row. The implication of this is that a worker
is rewarded for achieving both his own personal performance and his team's performance.
But the reward for improving his or her own performance is higher than the reward he
receives for improved team performance which is a collective achievement
Useful references
Factories can refer to the following books for consultation on setting up their compensation
structures:
+ Stress free performance appraisals, Sharon Armstrong and Madelyn Appelbaum, 2003
+ Productive performance appraisals, Paul Falcone with Randi Sachs, 2007
+ The Compensation Handbook, Sixth Edition: A State-of-the-Art Guide to Compensation
Strategy and Design (General Finance & Investing)
85
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Chapter 7: Leave management
1. The Importance of Leave Management
Leaves of absence are a fact of life. Proper leave management is necessary not only to comply legal
obligations, but also, and equally importantly, to help the business operate more effectively and to
address the employee's needs for time-off.
Over the past years, more data has come out supporting the benefits brought by granting extended
leave to the employees. According to studies, taking periodic breaks allow employees to refresh and
be more engaged at work, which, in turn, can lead to an increase in productivity of up to 30% and
revenues for the organisation can triple. > The benefits are, however, not limited to productivity.
Encouraging employees to take time off helps improve employees happiness, retention and prevent
burnout.
Recognising the importance of giving time off to employees, the Ethiopian Labour Law entitles workers
to paid leave.
2. Types of Leave
By the Ethiopian Labour Law, employees have the right to different types of leave. A summary of the
types of leave can be found below. However, for more detailed information on the legal provisions
regarding leave, please refer to the Ethiopian Labour Law.
Rest day
Although it is not technically a type of leave, employees have the right to at least one rest day per
week. Normally, employees are not required to work on their rest day. Working on the weekly rest
day may be allowed only for compelling grounds and payment for overtime work done on the rest
period, as stated in Chapter 6 Compensation under Overtime payment.
Annual Leave
According to the Ethiopian Labour Law, every employee is entitled to paid annual leave.
Duration:
+ The amount of annual leave depends on the length of service.
+ One year of service entitles the employee to a minimum leave of 14 working days;
+ For every additional year of service, the leave is 14 working days plus one working day for every
additional year of service.
> Achor, Shawn (2015). Are the People Who Take Vacations the Ones Who Get Promoted? , Harvard Business Review.
Retrieved from: https: //hbr. org/2015/06/are-the-people-who-take-vacations-the-ones-who-get-promoted
86
Payment:
Annual leave cannot be converted into money. In cases of termination, however, the annual
leave not taken by the employee shall be paid.
The payment received during the annual leave has to be equal to the employee's normal
payment (i. e. equal to what the employee would have received if he/she continued to work).
Sickness during leave: If an employee falls sick on annual leave, then sick leave applies.
Recall:
An employee who is on annual leave may be recalled for compelling reasons.
An employee who is recalled from leave is entitled to a payment covering the remainder of
his/her leave, excluding the time lost for the trip.
The employer shall pay the transport expenses incurred by the employee that has been
recalled and also per diem.
Requesting leave: For each leave of absence, employees need to go through the formal procedure of
filling leave (please refer to the form attached as Annex | and Ii of this chapter).
Annual Leave for New Employees
Employees who have less than one-year in the factories are not eligible for any paid annual
leave.
However, this usually leads to an increase in the rate of unauthorised absenteeism. To manage
this issue, factories should consider granting annual paid leave not after the first year but after
the first 6 months in the factory.
Sick leave
To be eligible for sick leave, an employee has to have completed the probation period.
Sick leave will apply in cases in which the sickness is not resulting from employment
injury/disease. In case the sickness is due to employment injuries, then the relevant provisions
of the law apply.
When the employee is absent due to sickness, he/she has to notify the employee the day
following his/her absence. In addition, he/she needs to bring a valid medical certificate from a
recognised heath centre (health centre includes both private and public health centres) unless
it is waived by the collective agreement.
The sick leave is for a maximum of 6 months. Payment during the sick leave is granted as follows:
Sickness Period Amount
The first one month Full wage (100%)
The next two months Half wage (50%)
The last three months No pay
87
Maternity leave
+ Pregnant employees are entitled to time off for medical examinations connected to the
pregnancy -provided that they present a medical certificate of the examination conducted. No
deductions from the wage/salary can be made for this time off.
+ Pre-natal leave: Pregnant employees are granted leave with pay for 30 consecutive days (1
month) preceding their due date.
+ Post-natal leave: Pregnant employees are granted 60 consecutive days (2 months) of paid leave
after giving birth.
+ Other specific additional leave shall be granted upon doctor's recommendation. This leave shall
also be paid.
The difference between pre-natal leave and post-natal leave is clearly stated in the labour proclamation and
they are not interchangeable.
Holiday leave
Recognised public holidays are paid leave, meaning that wage may not be deducted. This includes as
defined in the public holidays proclamation.
Other holidays, including regional holidays, that are not included in the public holiday proclamation,
are not considered as paid leave. Factories should be aware of these regional holidays and act at their
own discretion.
Special leave (with pay)
For any of the following cases, the employee should notify the employer in advance and present the
necessary evidence as requested by the employer.
+ Marriage of the employee: The employee is granted 3 working days of paid leave.
+ Bereavement/ mourning: The employee is granted 3 working days of paid leave in case of
death of close/immediate relative
+ Union leave: Paid leave is granted to trade union leaders for the purpose of presenting cases
in labour disputes, negotiating collective agreements, attending union meeting, seminars, and
training courses. The number of days for such leave is as required for the purpose.
+ Leaves for special purposes: Paid leave is granted to employees who appear at hearings
before court or labour enforcement organs or to exercise civic duty/rights (e. g. lave to vote in
elections and testify in court). The amount of days for such leave is as required for the purpose.
Leave for Family Events
1) A worker shall be entitled to leave with pay for three working days when;
a) he concludes marriage; or
b) his spouse or descendants or ascendants or another relative, whether by affinity or
consanguinity up to the second-degree dies.
2) A worker shall be entitled to leave without pay for up to 5 consecutive days in the case of
exceptional and serious events.
88
Exceptional/personal leave without pay
An employee is entitled to leave without pay for up to 5 consecutive days in the case of exceptional
and serious events.
Leave for national call
Employees are entitled to take unpaid leave for a national call (e. g. military), as needed, to enable
them to fulfil their obligations.
Leave without pay by agreement
The employee may be granted, upon the discretion of the employer, unpaid leave for various reasons.
Thus, when an employee's need for a longer leave cannot be entertained by the leaves discussed
above, leave without pay can be arranged by agreement.
Study leaves
Study leaves may be granted but the specifics are to be regulated by collective agreements (if any) or
work rules.
3. Unauthorised Leave
Unauthorised leave of absence is when the employee fails to come to work without a justifiable
reason, thus it does not include any of the cases presented in the previous section.
Factories should be concerned about unauthorised leave, as a high level of can cause significant costs
to the factory coming from disturbances in planning and not being able to meet targets due to lack of
employees. Therefore, managing unauthorised leave should be a priority for factories right from the
beginning.
The factory leadership and all supervisors down the hierarchy need to set the tone about
unauthorised leave during the induction period, in refreshing trainings and through spontaneous
reminders. After communicating a clear message, when unauthorised leave happens, the responsible
supervisor needs to conduct return-to-work interviews, which can help identify reasons and work on
preventive measures.
To manage unauthorised absence due to health-related issues, factories should include regular
reviews with sick employees, planning workplace adjustments and involving occupational health
professionals. In this way, factories can contribute to employees returning faster and preventing
absences due to the same reason from repeating.
Other tools to manage unauthorised absence may include well-being surveys to acquire a deeper
understanding of different factors that may influence unauthorised leave, such as employee
satisfaction, well-being, levels of work stress experienced by employees and also conflicts at the
workplace.
89
4. Enforcing the leave policy
During onboarding, all employees should receive, as a printed handout, the different kinds of leave to
which they are entitled and the procedures for requesting them. A sample is provided in Annex ili of
this chapter.
In order to better manage employees absence, it is necessary to properly track each employee's
combined authorised and unauthorised annual leave (a simple Leave Summary is provided in Annex IV of
this chapter for this purpose). This will help the factory understand how much time is lost per employee
and may also contribute to calculating the costs incurred because of lost productivity, needs to
reshuffle workers to cover for absent ones, etc. Monitoring and collecting absence related data can
also help shed light onto the extent and cause of absence issues. All the information collected can,
then, help the management to make informed decisions and build a strategy to manage absences
more effectively.
The measures to be taken in case of unauthorized leave should be part of the disciplinary procedure of the
company, where the detailed consequences of this type of absence must be clearly stated (Refer to
chapter 9, Disciplinary procedure, Annex | Guidelines for the classification of offences and progressive
disciplinary sanctions). Managers and supervisors have to enforce this policy from the beginning.
Supervisors / managers should first talk to the worker to understand if there is any justification for
the absence, and emphasise the importance of asking for leave. In cases of absence without
acceptable reasons, a written warning can be handled to the worker. After 5 consecutive days of
unauthorized leave, if there is no valid/acceptable reason from the side of the employee that justifies
the absence, the company is allowed to dismiss the employee.
Useful absence measurements:
= Lost time rate (the percentage of possible working time lost to absence)
@ Frequency rate (the average number of absence periods per employee).
Once leave is regularly tracked and analysed, trends can be identified to analyse causes and address
the root of the problem, if any identified in order to take preventive measures.
5 Employers can ask for supporting documents to assess whereas an employee had an acceptable reason for the
absence e. g. a letter written by local authorities or an informal support group (called "Edir") for mourning leave,
medical certificates for sickness, court or police letter for any legal matters.
90
Annex I: Leave Request and Authorization Form
Date:
Name:
Department/Function:
Leave Requested from (date): to
Total number of working days:
Reason:
Type of Leave:
[] Annual Leave [] sick Leave
[] Maternity Leave [] Wedding Leave
[] Bereavement Leave [] Union Leave
[] Other Leave (please specify):
Applicant's Signature: Date:
Approved as Requested:
Department/Function Manager's Signature:
Carry over annual leave days from previous year:
Current year annual leave entitlements:
Annual leave days taken in current year:
Annual leave balance:
Annex Il: Leave without Pay Request and Authorisation
Form
Leave without Pay Requested from (date): to
Applicant's Signature:
Comment of Immediate Supervisor:
Approved as Requested
Supervisor Signature CEO/Chief Signature (if necessary)
92
Annex lll: Types of leave
By the Ethiopian Labour Law, employees have the right to different types of leave. If any employee
wants to apply for any of these leaves, they must follow all the procedures set up by the factory
todo so.
Every employee is entitled to paid annual leave.
e One year of service entitles the employee to a minimum leave of 14 working days;
e For every additional year of service, the leave is 14 working days plus one working
day for every additional year of service.
To take annual leave, employees must notify the factory in advance.
following his/her absence. In addition, he/she needs to bring a valid medical certificate from
a recognised heath centre (health centre includes both private and public health centres)
unless it is waived by the collective agreement.
eo Pregnant employees are entitled to time off for medical examinations connected to
the pregnancy provided that they present a medical certificate of the examination
conducted. No deductions from the wage/salary can be made for this time off.
eo Pre-natal leave: Pregnant employees are granted leave with pay for 30 consecutive
days (1 month) preceding their due date.
e Post-natal leave: Pregnant employees are granted 60 consecutive days (2 months) of
paid leave after giving birth.
Other additional leave shall be granted upon doctor's recommendation.
Special leave with pay can be given for the following reasons.
eo Marriage of the employee: The employee is granted 3 working days of paid leave.
eo Bereavement/ mourning: The employee is granted 3 working days of paid leave in
case of death of close/immediate relative
eo Union leave: Paid leave is granted to trade union leaders for the purpose of
presenting cases in labour disputes, negotiating collective agreements, attending
union meeting, seminars, and training courses. The number of days for such leave is
as required for the purpose.
eo Leaves for special purposes: Paid leave is granted to employees who appear at
hearings before court or labour enforcement organs or to exercise civic duty/rights
(e. g. lave to vote in elections and testify in court). The amount of days for such leave
is as required for the purpose.
o If they intend to take any of these leaves, employees must notify the factory
in advance.
93
An employee is entitled to leave without pay for up to 5 consecutive days in the
case of exceptional and serious events.
Employees must notify the factory in advance.
Employees are entitled to take unpaid leave for a national call (e. g. military), as
needed, to enable them to fulfil their obligations.
The employee may be granted, upon the discretion of the employer, unpaid
leave for various reasons. Thus, when an employee's need for a longer leave
cannot be entertained by the leaves discussed above, leave without pay can be
arranged by agreement.
94
Annex IV: Leave Summary Format
Leave Summary for: (Month), (Year)
Prepared by: Approved by:
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Chapter 8: Grievance procedure
A grievance is a complaint, dissatisfaction or feeling of injustice in connection with an employee's work
and employment situation that is brought to the attention of management or the employer. The
source of grievance may be general working conditions, harassment and discrimination (including
sexual harassment and discrimination) or interpersonal relations within the organisation.
Factories typically put in place a grievance procedure to address employee concerns before they lead
to more serious employee relations issues (dispute, court cases, strike and/or lockout), decline in
motivation and employee engagement at their working place. The grievance procedure, when drawn
up carefully and implemented consistently, lead to better workplace satisfaction and employee
engagement as well as to more productivity. Moreover, management in factories can use the
information obtained through the grievance procedure to come up with creative solutions to deal with
issues that employees bring to management's attention.
Studies conducted on functioning grievance handling systems in factories have shown that the
existence of an effective grievance handling procedure leads to:
+ better relationships in factories
+ more productivity
 lower absenteeism
+ lower turnover rates
However, grievance mechanisms have to function well to achieve these results. Factories (not only in
Ethiopia but all over the world) sometimes have grievance mechanisms that are just a formality to
comply with client requirements. Factories should not be proud not to have any grievance, as this does
not necessarily imply that employees do not have any issues to report, but in fact, that employees do not
know how the procedure works or do not trust it.
7 Fair Labour Association (2008). How a functioning Grievance procedure may positively impact a factory's
performance; John F Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University (2008). Rights-compatible grievance
mechanisms. A guidance tool for companies and their stakeholders.
96
Guiding principles for the establishment of grievance procedures, according to the UN Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights
1. Legitimate: The grievance mechanism should be perceived as legitimate by the
affected stakeholder groups (management, supervisors and workers), and should
be jointly designed and overseen by the factory and those stakeholder groups
concerned in order to generate trust
2. Publicised and accessible: The grievance mechanism should be publicised and
readily accessible by all parties. Therefore, it should be available in all relevant
languages spoken in a region
3. Transparent: The grievance mechanism should operate on a presumption of
transparency of process (e. g. investigation) and results, while allowing for dialogue
to remain confidential.
4. Based on engagement and dialogue: The grievance mechanism should focus on
engagement and dialogue between the parties, with the aim of identifying
sustainable, rights compatible solutions that are acceptable to all and that will
contribute to a better working environment.
5. Predictable in terms of process: The grievance mechanism should provide
predictability in terms of the key steps and options within the process should be
time-bound where appropriate and provide for agreed outcomes to be monitored.
6. Fair and empowering: The grievance mechanism should seek to redress
imbalances in power, knowledge and influence between the company and
potential complainants to enable informed dialogue, a shared responsibility for
outcomes and a process based on respect
7. A source of continuous learning: The effectiveness of the mechanism should be
measured and cumulative lessons from complaints should be reviewed to identify
systemic changes needed to either company practices or the workings of the
grievance mechanism.
1. How to establish effective grievance handling systems
No matter which the grievance mechanisms established in the factory are, there are certain guidelines
that can be followed in order to create effective, transparent, fair and empowering practices.
There should be commitment from factory management to acknowledge and address employee
grievances. Involvement of management in grievance process helps to give this process the
importance it should have in the factory and guarantee that grievances will be used to improve
factory practices at all levels. If management neglects grievances, it is likely that the grievance
procedures will not be fully implemented will be ineffective.
One grievance mechanism (i. e. the formal procedure that is usually set up in the factory) is
usually not enough to address all the challenges and problems that can be channelled through
grievances. Therefore, factories should have a combination of informal method of addressing
grievances e. g. through communication with workers representatives, counsellors, team
leaders or supervisor/manager and formal methods of submitting grievances through the use of
anonymous methods e. g. suggestion box or grievance forms/letters.
97
 Employees should be trained and encouraged to share their grievances and concerns. Clear and
consistent communication of procedures through onboarding, periodic refresher training and
inclusion in the employee handbook must be provided. Moreover, a working environment that
is open for suggestions and that values opinions of employees should be created in the
factory. It should be clearly communicated to workers that grievances must be first raised and
addressed internally, following the grievance mechanisms that the factory has established,
before appealing to any other instance that is external to the factory.
+ While all employees should receive training on grievances, factory key position holders should
be prepared more thoroughly. Team leaders, supervisors and managers must receive training on
how to receive, address, solve, communicate and document grievances.
+ Workers representatives can help not only to address grievances, but also provide ideas on
designing grievance mechanisms in a way that the procedures are adjusted to the needs of
workers. Workers representatives should also be trained in grievance handling and be involved in
the process along with the management.
 Once a grievance issue is solved, there shouldbe a HR departments should keep records
timely, transparent and consistent feedback on the
outcomes of handling the grievance issue. It should
be communicated to the employees concerned (if
confidential in nature) and to the wider employee
body (if the case affects all or a significant majority
of employees).
of all the grievances, document how
they have been handled and post the
outcomes and actions taken for the
grievances that affect the majority of
the employees. This will not only
generate trust, but also encourage
 Grievances should be actively used to refine policies, them to further communicate their
procedures and factory practices. grievances.
An effective grievance handling procedure helps factories
not only to address currentissues, but also should be perceived and used as a tool to identify potential
grievance issues. It should help factories to solve the grievances in the shortest time possible with no
or little disruption to the factory's operation.
2. Whistle blowing
Whistle blowing is the act of alerting the management or employer about alleged acts of dishonesty
and / or illegal acts and misconduct at the workplace.
In some instances, grievance procedures are coupled with whistle blowing practices to ensure that
employees feel safe enough to report illegal and unethical actions of colleagues and/or supervisors
without fear of negative repercussions.
Employees may occasionally opt to report grievances, alleged acts of dishonesty and /or illegal acts
and misconduct at the workplace anonymously. This can be done either by using a simple note that
is inserted into a suggestion box or a toll-free telephone line operated by an independent third party
assigned by the organisation. In both cases, the HR department is responsible to collect as much detail
as possible and respond to employees in an open forum since there is a possibility of not being able
98
to identify a particular employee as an aggrieved party. A reasonable timeline to investigate the
grievance and provide a solution/response would be established based on the particular situation of
the organization.
Suggestion/ grievance hoxes
If the company decides to use these boxes, there should be a review procedure that
establishes:
o Responsible party for opening the box
Specific timeline to open the boxes
o Recording procedure: including register of the grievance, the action taken and how it is
communicated to employees
3. Developing a grievance mechanism
The grievance mechanism should be designed by each factory. Ideally, the HR department will involve
workers representatives, counsellors, team leaders or supervisor/managers in the development of the
procedure, to have a clear idea of what are the main grievances that should be prevented and
addressed from an early stage. The following is an example for a grievance mechanism in the factory
(the stages, time periods and responsibilities described are based in common practices but should be
adapted to each factory).
1.
The aggrieved employee (the one who has a complaint to express) should first discuss his/her
grievance with the immediate supervisor verbally within 5 working days of the incident causing
the grievance. The immediate supervisor should provide a verbal response and solution within
7 working days of the presentation of the grievance. If for any reason this does not happen
or the response and solution prove unsatisfactory, the employee may take his/her case to the
next level authority in writing. In case the grievance concerns the immediate supervisor, the
incident would be presented to the next level of authority from the beginning.
The next level of authority shall provide a written response and solution within a period of 7
working days. He/she should take the case to the next level authority to prove inadequate; the
employee may arrange a grievance meeting with the human resources (HR) office by filling a
formal grievance form.
The grievance form should clearly indicate a complete description of the issue involved, the
date of the alleged incident, and references to a specific policy allegedly to have been
improperly applied. It should also indicate the responses received from earlier stages.
HR will review the grievance form and the aggrieved person will receive a written response
within 5 working days of receiving the completed form. HR will interview the employee (in the
presence of workers representative, if so desired by the aggrieved employee) immediate
supervisor and the next level of authority to obtain a complete picture of the grievance and
subsequent steps taken.
If the response provided by HR is not satisfactory, the employee may present the grievance to
the highest authority in the organisation.
99
6. In some cases, a grievance may be presented by workers representatives when there are
multiples of aggrieved employees. In this case, a joint consultation between the HR
department and workers representative would be held to resolve the matter as swiftly and as
effectively as possible.
7. HR is responsible to prepare a grievance log with details of grievance incidents. A grievance
log is a document prepared by the HR of the organisation to provide a complete
documentation of the grievance incident and the remedial action taken by the organisation
with the aim of providing future reference on the incident. A template is provided in Annex II to
8. If the aggrieved employee chooses to remain anonymous, then the whistle blowing process
must be applied.
4. Beyond grievances: towards improved communication and
practises
The existing grievance handling procedures should be regularly reviewed and improved to ensure
that grievance issues are being founded and resolved. It is important to keep in mind that lack of
grievances being communicated (and the factory is still facing high turn-over, low productivity and low
motivation) should not be considered as a good sign, but as a sign of alarm that the communication
channels in the factory are not effective.
Whereas the establishment of grievance procedures can be achieved in the short to medium term
(grievance boxes, the establishment of a system for recording grievances, etc. ), finding long term
solutions that improve the communication between workers and managers is a continuous process
that focuses on an overall improvement of communication and dialogue in the factory.
The development of dialogue practices in the factory enable workers and managers to acquire skills
and knowledge to improve effective communication, enhance cooperation and mutual
understanding, and to develop participatory organisational structures that promote sustainability in
the factory's existing practices.
Providing counselling, both about work and personal issues, is a valuable tool to channel the concerns
of workers, as they might not only be related to the factory but to their new living environment.
Although it may not always be able to solve the problems faced by the workers, it can offer much
needed psychological support and thereby alleviate some of the feelings of frustration and being
overwhelmed experienced by the workers. This can help to increase the sense of well-being among
workers and, in this way, help factories to increase retention.
An effective grievance handling procedure not only helps to address current issues. It should also be used
as a tool to identify trends and its causes, in order to design preventive measures that help solve them in
the shortest time possible with no or little disruption to the factory's operation.
100
Annex I: Employee Grievance Form
To be completed by an aggrieved employee and submitted to:
1. Human Resources
2. Employee Representative (if required)
3. Aggrieved employee to keep a copy
Name of employee: Employee ID number:
Position title: Department:
Name of Immediate Supervisor Line Manager:
Aggrieved by
Grievance:
Attach additional sheets of paper if necessary
Desired outcome:
Signature of employee: Signature of Employee Rep: If applicable
Signature of designated HR function staff: Date received:
HR Function response:
Outcome of grievance (if necessary with reasons for failure to reach a settlement):
Employee Signature: Employee Rep Signature (if required)
Line Manager Signature: Date:
101
Annex ll: Grievance Log
Grievance Log
*Code: Grievances need to be coded in order to protect confidentiality.
+ Salary
- PPE
+ Bullying/Mobbing
+ Mental or physical coercion (threatening)
 Verbal Harassment
+ Physical Harassment
 Sexual Harassment
 Intimidation
+ Corruption
+ Confiscating of Personal Items
+ Stealing of Personal Items
+ Stealing of Company Property
+ Factory Services
+ Other TBD by factories
 HR Department
 Workers representatives
 Counsellors
102
e Factory Management
+ Grievance/ suggestion Box
Possible grievance statuses:
+ Under Investigation
 Internal Mediation Process
 External Mediation Process (relevant institutions)
+ Legal or Court Proceedings
+ Settled internally
+ Settled by external institution in Favour of the Factory
+ Settled by external institution in Favour of the complainant
+ Settled by Court Decision in Favour of the Factory
+ Settled by Court Decision in Favour of the complainant
+ Pending - Process not followed-up
+ Not applicable (outside the scope of the factory/ irrelevant)
103
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Chapter 9: Disciplinary procedure
Discipline is a corrective measure and not a punitive process. The primary purpose of discipline is to
encourage employees to correct their conduct or performance at work. This should be done through
the application of progressive sanctions.
Although general rules and procedures should be established and The rules and procedures of
enforced, it is important to consider the particularities of each case the factory must be specific
to be able to determine an appropriate sanction, as sanctions and clear, adapted to the local
depend on the merits of each case and should take into accountthe language and clearly
context and gravity of the offence.
communicated and explained
to the workers. This has to be
Developing and enforcing a clear, transparent, fair and well achieved on the short term so
communicated disciplinary procedure in the factory has numerous as to prevent conflicts and
positive consequences, among them: misunderstandings coming
from the lack of clear
It promotes a harmonious working environment, helping to
procedures.
achieve organizational goals.
It establishes common guidelines to promote certainty and consistency in dealing with
misconduct.
It defines consistent, fair and predictable consequences to offenses; describing how it will deal
with any occurrences of misconduct and giving guidelines on the application of disciplinary
sanctions.
It guides supervisors and managers in the discipline of employees, ensuring a fair, just,
equitable and consistent treatment and reducing the likelihood of arbitrary decisions by
supervisors/managers
It guides employees with regards to what will be deemed as unacceptable conduct, preventing
misunderstandings, confusion and feelings of unfairness, and therefore reducing the
likelihood of negative employee relations consequences, such as strikes and lockouts
It reduces the legal expenses, time and reputational risk of the employer as a result of court
cases regarding unlawful termination or issues related to disciplinary cases
1. Development and enforcement of disciplinary procedure
The disciplinary procedure should be applied equally to all employees of the factory, regardless of
their contract status (indefinite period, definite period, casual employment), position in the
organizational level (worker, supervisor, manager, etc. ) or nationality (expats and Ethiopian nationals)
The Ethiopian labour proclamation establishes the basis for termination with and without notice on
disciplinary grounds. Factories must make sure to follow the provisions stated in the labour
proclamation.
104
Employee conduct which may warrant disciplinary action and sanctions that may be applied are listed
as Annex | to this chapter.
Even if it is not possible nor practical to list ~~ The listed sanctions cannot be an exhaustive list of
every possible misconduct in a factory, some all offences that may be committed in a factory, this
common misconducts that workers tend to would be a never-ending list. Therefore, all
incur in should be listed and communicated to employees should be aware that they may be
workers, such as: disciplined in respect of any conduct if the
Sleeping in the workplace employee knew, or ought to have known that the
Using the phone/earphones in the work conduct constituted grounds for disciplinary action.
place As mentioned, factories should consider in every
 Eating in the workplace case: the circumstances and seriousness of the
Not using the adequate PPE
Taking away company products outside
the factory
o Tardiness (at arrival time and after
breaks) and leaving earlier without
permission
misconduct; any instances of repeated misconduct;
the employee's circumstances; the nature of the
job; and, generally, the application of the principles
of corrective discipline and consistency with the
need for each case to be judged on its own merits.
It is recommended that counselling is provided to
employees that have committed first time minor offences. A short informal talk with the immediate
supervisor is recommended, in which the consequences of the offence are explained to the worker
both on the productivity aspects e. g. increase of workload on peers, delayed delivery time; and on the
disciplinary consequences to the specific employee.
o Maintain fair, just and consistent discipline
Ensure employees are aware of the standards of acceptable behaviour
expected from them
Comply with all rules and procedures of the employer
Comply with the law
Behave in an orderly and lawful manner
Familiarize themselves with the employer's policies and procedures
oO 0 0 OO 0 O
Educate employees on Organizational procedures through disseminating
policies and procedures
o Train managers on handling disciplinary procedures
o Guide Supervisors and Employees on corrective procedures
105
2. Types of disciplinary sanctions
Whereas the seriousness of the misconduct is what determines how the offences will be dealt with
(for reference see Annex | to this chapter), the types of disciplinary sanctions that can be taken by the
factory are:
Verbal warning
In the event of a minor offence on the part of the employee, the disciplinary action will be a
verbal reprimand.
The immediate supervisor will inform the employee of the intention to discuss the minor
misconduct and advise them of their right to bring employee representation to the discussion
The immediate supervisor will bring the misconduct to the employee's attention, determine
the reasons for the misconduct and give an employee the opportunity to respond to the
allegations and will seek to get an agreement on how to remedy the conduct.
After hearing the employee's submissions, if the immediate supervisor deems it appropriate,
he/she may issue a verbal warning reiterating the proper conduct expected of the employee.
The employee's immediate supervisor will maintain a record of verbal warnings issued. The
verbal warning is valid for 3 months from the date of issue.
Repeat offences will follow a progressive sanction
Written warning
An employee may be given a written warning by the Immediate supervisor where the
seriousness of the misconduct warrants one.
The immediate supervisor will bring the misconduct to the employee's attention. The
employee will be requested to attend a meeting with HR present and may be represented by
a fellow employee or employee representative. The immediate supervisor will determine the
reasons for the misconduct and give an employee the opportunity to respond to the
allegations and mitigating circumstances if required.
If after hearing the employee's submissions the immediate supervisor deems it appropriate,
he/she may issue a written warning reiterating the proper conduct expected of the employee.
The Immediate supervisor may issue a written warning to correct the behaviour. HR will
ensure that the sanction is appropriate as per policy and labour proclamation and signs the
letter jointly.
The immediate supervisor must capture the warning accordingly and the employee must
acknowledge receipt thereof. If the employee refuses to sign the warning letter, the immediate
supervisor must hand in the letter in the presence of an HR representative or another
employee who will act as witness. The witnessing employee and must sign in confirmation
that the written warning was conveyed to the employee.
The written warning must be filed in the employee's file. The warning remains valid for six
months. After six (6) months the written warning will expire unless there is another offence
committed within the period.
106
If during the six (6) month period the employee is subjected to disciplinary action on a same
or related offence, the written warning may be taken into account in deciding the appropriate
sanction.
Final Written warning
In cases where the seriousness of the misconduct warrants a final written warning, the
immediate supervisor and HR may give the employee a final written warning.
a fellow employee or staff representative. The Immediate supervisor will determine the
allegations and present mitigating circumstances if so required.
he/she may issue a final written warning reiterating the proper conduct expected of the
employee. The immediate supervisor and HR may issue a final written warning to correct the
employee's behaviour.
The final written warning is valid for twelve (12) months.
Dismissal
In cases of serious misconduct and very serious misconduct, an appropriate sanction including
dismissal may be imposed. All dismissal decisions should be consulted with a legal advisor in order to
avoid litigation as a result of unlawful termination
3. Best practices for an effective disciplinary procedure
Adisciplinary procedure is effective only when it is applied fairly and consistently. Best practices in an
effective disciplinary procedure include:
Documenting all procedures and actions taken when handling offenses. Non-
documentation of procedures will not only lead to confusion inside the factory, but will also
have negative consequences if a case is taken to court by the employee. Factories must make
sure that everything related to a disciplinary case is documented, including proof if applicable.
Training and communication to employees, supervisors/managers and the HR
department.
o Every member of the HRD must be an expert on handling disciplinary cases, since they
are in charge of managing all relationships in the factory.
o Next, supervisors, who are the first line of contact with workers and usually have to
operate under pressure from the management and the team, have to have a thorough
knowledge of the violating behaviours and how to handle disciplinary cases. In order
to prevent conflicts, supervisors must also be trained on how to manage stress and
teams. If they lack this ability, they are more likely to ignore the procedures that must
be followed in cases of misbehaviour, which can end up in legal cases in which the
factory can easily lose.
107
o Management has to be knowledgeable and highly compliant with the factory own
disciplinary procedure. In particular, expats managers have to be aware of the legal
steps that must be followed in the country in order to take disciplinary action.
o Employees should be informed and regularly reminded of the rules of behaviour in
the factory. A mere list of good and bad behaviour may not be enough as they also
need to understand how offences have negative consequences for the factory and for
their co-workers. Applying action learning methods in which workers deal with
complex issues, develop solutions, take empowered action, learn from each other and
engage in reflection can help workers to better understand and follow the disciplinary
Visual reminders of the most common disciplinary offences are a good way to remind the
workforce about what is considered good and bad behaviour in the factory. Photos and
graphics will have more impact that just texts describing the code of conduct of the
organisation.
Understand the causes behind offences. If certain offence is being committed regularly in
the factory, this should be seen as a sign of lack of knowledge, misunderstanding or other
underlying issues. HR should understand the causes behind the offence and prepare a
strategy to prevent further misbehaviour. It is recommended to involve workers
representatives in this process.
Clear and predictable consequences. The consequences of offence should be clear,
predictable for everyone and applied consistently among all the workforce.
Register all disciplinary actions. Disciplinary offences and the actions taken should be
registered and tracked in a Disciplinary action log. This will allow to detect trends on the main
sources, reasons and departments that are more problematic to the factory and take
preventive action. A template for the development of the Disciplinary Action Log can be found in
Annex Il to this chapter.
Learn from experience. The lessons learned from the development and application of the
disciplinary procedure should also be documented and used for future improvements in the
execution of policies, communication or training, following an approach of continuous
improvement.
4. Code of conduct and work ethics While the code of conduct is
usually developed by the
A code of conduct is a key governance best practice that guides management, factories are
your business policies, procedures, and practices. Moreover, encouraged to make it a
it helps to ensure compliance with international standards participatory activity, as it will
and national laws and regulations that are applicable to all more likely achieve full
activities in the factory. implementation and integration
Moreover, a code of conduct serves the factory to:
within the organization when
employees are involved in its
Show employees that the factory is has a genuine creation.
interest in doing business responsibly
108
+ Show clients (brands) that the factory values integrity. A code serves as a public statement of
what the company stands for and its commitment to high standards and right conduct. Brands
and other stakeholders appreciate that some attempt is being made to develop a company
culture of responsibility and honesty.
+ Sensitize employees to things that may not have been obvious to them and avoid inadvertent,
yet potentially harmful, missteps.
+ Provide a clear point of reference when enforcing corrective action
5. Basic principles of work ethics
While the code of conduct should reflect the organizational values of the company, there are certain
topics that are recognized as relevant by the international community.
5.1. Equal employment opportunity
Equal employment opportunity is the principle that ensures all employees and potential employees are
treated equitably and fairly, regardless of their race, ethnic background, religion, sex, marital status, age,
physical or intellectual impairment, or sexual preference. This principle aims to ensure that all employees
are given equal access to opportunities through all the stages of the employment life cycle without
considering any factor that is not related to their competencies or ability to perform their duties. An
equal employment opportunity employer is committed to the implementation of fair, equitable and
non-discriminatory practices to create an inclusive company culture that fosters acceptance and
respect for diversity.
5.2. Anti- Harassment and Violence
This principle aims to ensure that no employee is subjected to any form of violence or harassment
while at work.
Workplace violence may not always be a critical or extreme situation from the outset. It sometimes
follows a pattern of escalating behaviour from agitation, expressed anger or frustration and
intimidating body language, to verbal/written abuse and threats, physical threats, or assault.
Harassment is a type of violence that can be defined as any unwelcome action (any action which the
harasser knows or ought to reasonably know is not desired by the victim) by any person, whether
verbal or physical, on a single or repeated basis, which humiliates insults or degrades.
Sexual harassment
Sexual harassment can happen in any organization and should be taken seriously by all factories. It
can be defined as any unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature that makes a person feel offended,
humiliated or intimidated. In labour intensive factories, such as garment, it should be especially
prevented, as some of its characteristics such as power differences, vulnerability of the workers,
109
high pressure to meet production targets, are factors that can lead to a hostile working
environment.
5.3. Anti- Corruption
Factories should commit to prevent and eliminate any attempt or possibility of corruption or bribery,
in particular in key positions that might affect the company performance and reputation. For this,
clear guidelines should be set to clarify what are acceptable practices and what is considered as
bribery and/or corruption.
Conflict of interest: A conflict of interest arises in the workplace when an employee has
competing interests or loyalties that either is or potentially can be, at odds with each other.
In order to prevent this situation, the factories can define rules to outline what is considered
as conflict of interest and how any conflict in this area will be resolved.
5.4. Child labour
The International Labour Organization, defines child labour as work by children under the age of
12; work by children under the age of 15 that prevents from attending to school and work by children
under of age of 18 that is hazardous to the physical or mental health of the child. According to the
Ethiopian labour proclamation (Article 89) the statutory minimum age for young workers is 14 years.
The minimum age for hazardous work in Ethiopia is set as 18 years and workers between the ages of
14 to 18 years are classified as young workers. Factories are encouraged to develop a policy to clarify
the acceptable age for their workers and to prevent the employment of children (for example,
mechanisms to verify the age of a candidate when in doubt).
5.5. Occupational Health and Safety
Factories should be committed to maintain a safe working environment and to develop procedures
to eliminate or mitigate any hazard or potential hazard at the workplace. This includes setting up a
safe infrastructure, developing and enforcing a policy for health and safety and providing the workers
with training and the required personal protective equipment.
5.6. Forced labour
According to ILO, forced labour can be understood as work that is performed involuntarily and under
the menace of any penalty. It refers to situations in which persons are coerced to work through the
use of violence or intimidation, or by more subtle means such as manipulated debt, retention of
8 Better Work. Research brief: Garment Factory Characteristics and Workplace: Sexual Harassment. Retrieved from:
https: //betterwork. org/global/wp-content/uploads/Research-Brief-Sexual-Harassment-LR-Rnd5-4. pdf in 02/05/2019
9 ILO. Main topics. ILO Conventions and Recommendations on child labour
110
identity papers or threats of denunciation to immigration authorities. ' Factories should commit to
avoid any situation that classifies as forced labour.
10 1LO. Main topics. Forced labour, modern slavery and human trafficking. Retrieved from:.
https: //www. ilo. org/global/topics/forced-labour/definition/lang--en/index. htm in 02/05/2019
111
Annex |: Guidelines for the classification of offences and
progressive disciplinary sanctions
Note: this classification is provided as a recommendation. Each factory should establish their own
disciplinary procedure and progressive sanctions.
Classification Description 1stt 2nd 3rd" 4th
of offence offence | offence | offence | offence
1 | Dishonesty Dishonesty of any nature, including Dismissal
Fraud theft; fraud; bribery; corruption;
counterfeiting; making of a false
statement or presenting false testimony;
industrial espionage; misappropriation
of money; unauthorized removal,
possession or use of organization,
colleagues or clients property;
blackmailing or misrepresentation;
giving or receiving of a bribe to incite or
attempt to incite a person to commit
corruption.
Any attempt, collaboration or favouring Final Dismissal
of a person to any of the above Written
offences. Warning
2 | Behaviour Sabotage: any purposeful or malicious Dismissal
to the action to disrupt the normal business of
detriment the Organization by damaging any
of the machinery or equipment or by
employer disrupting essential power flow,
material or services.
Unauthorized work for a competitor or Final Dismissal
working in direct competition to the Written
employer. Warning
Moonlighting, doing other work without | Final Dismissal
management approval. Written
Warning
Failure to account for Organization Dismissal
funds.
Unauthorized dissemination of Final Dismissal
Organization's information. Written
Damaging, including spoiling work, or Written Final Dismissal
wastage of the Organization's, clients or | Warning Written
fellow employees possessions. Warning
Being found guilty in a criminal court Final Dismissal
which could in the Organization's Written
opinion have a negative impact on the Warning/
employer / employee relationship. Dismissal
(Depending on seriousness of the case)
Any behaviour that impacts negatively Written Dismissal
on the organization, business unit or Warning/
clients. (Depending on seriousness of Final
the case) Written
112
Any attempt, collaboration of favouring Written Dismissal
of a person to any of the above Warning/
offences. Final
Written
Unauthorized possession or Dismissal
misappropriation of Organization
property, or property belonging to other
employees, customers or suppliers.
Attempting to conceal evidence of Final
misappropriation or attempted Written
misappropriation. Warning/
3 | Gross Refusal and/or failure and/or Written Final Dismissal
Insubordina carelessness to carry out a lawful and Warning Written
tion reasonable instruction; deliberately Warning
ignoring authority of employer;
continuous unruly and defiant
behaviour
Refusal and/or failure to carry out a Dismissal
lawful and reasonable instruction and
such action results in a loss for the
Organization, which may result in
physical harm to the employees,
financial, reputational and property
damage to the Organization.
4 Impertinence, impudence or Verbal Written Final Dismissal
Insubordina rebelliousness towards superiors. Warning Warning Written
tion Warning
Refusal to obey a reasonable instruction | Verbal Written Final Dismissal
without a valid reason. The onus is on Warning Warning Written
the employee to justify his/her refusal or Warning
disobedience.
5 | Gross Negligent damaging of organization Written Final Dismissal
Negligence property/ management of organization Warning Written
property. Warning
Failure to wear issued safety protective Dismissal
clothing and equipment when instructed
or required.
6 | Negligence Breach of procedures and practices, Verbal Written Final Dismissal
failure to correctly execute duties Warning Warning Written
according the Organization's standards Warning
and expectations. The Negligence test
will be whether a reasonable person in
that position of the employee would
have foreseen the harm resulting from
his/her act or omission and would have
taken steps to prevent the harm.
7 | Workplaces Victimization, intimidation, unfair Dismissal
Work discrimination of harassment of any
related kind, including sexual harassment.
relations Non-compliance with safety / security Written Final Dismissal
regulations or other safety procedures, Warning Written
where the consequences of such Warning
behaviour are potentially dangerous.
An act of violence, physical harm to Dismissal
another person, fighting or assault
113
Any threat to commit violence or to do Final Dismissal
physical harm to another person; Written
fighting, assault, intimidation or Warning
instigation of other employees to
commit violence.
Any act that promotes tension or Final Dismissal
disharmony in the workplace. Written
Damaging the Organization's, clients or Final Dismissal
fellow employee's possessions. Written
Falsifying or altering records or Dismissal
documents.
Providing false or misleading Dismissal
information in Job application
documentation or during interviews.
Failing to take disciplinary action when Verbal Written Final Dismissal
necessary/required. Warning Warning Written
8 | Other Under the influence of alcohol/drugs on | Dismissal
misbehavio Organization premises while on duty (or
ur: General while on duty outside of the premises)
The use or possession of alcohol or the Final Dismissal
unauthorized use of alcohol on Written
Organization or clients premises while Warning
on duty.
Failing to comply with prescribed or Written Final Dismissal
established procedures, policies, Warning Written
regulations, practices or rules, which Warning
apply where the consequences are
serious or potentially serious.
Failure to comply with health, fire Written Final Dismissal
and/or safety regulations, including Warning Written
failure to report a fire, accident or Warning
emergency.
Unauthorized and/or un-communicated | Written Final Dismissal
absence without a valid/acceptable Warning Written
reason for less than 5 consecutive Warning
workdays. The onus is on the employee
to justify the absence and the reasons
for not informing the employer.
Unauthorized and/or un-communicated | Dismissal
absence without a valid/acceptable
reason for more than 5 consecutive
A history of unauthorized absence over Final Dismissal
short periods of time. Written
Sleeping on duty. Written Final Dismissal
Warning Written
Leave the workplace without Written Final Dismissal
permission. Warning Written
114
Late coming (up to 30 minutes). Verbal Written Final Dismissal
Warning Warning Written
Late coming (More than 30 minutes). Written Final Dismissal
Failing to meet set deadlines or to Written Final Dismissal
complete work timorously. Warning Written
Extending authorized break period (tea Written Final Dismissal
break, meal break) without permission. Warning Written
Failure to clock in or out or failure to Verbal Written Final Dismissal
register. Warning Warning Written
Misuse of access card. Written Final Dismissal
Failure to leave the premises when Final Dismissal
instructed to do so. Written
115
Annex Il: Disciplinary Log
Date name ID Name
Employee | Employee | Supervisor | Collected
by
Accountable
Department
Category
Description
Action
taken
ole oN [ous wv |=
11
Possible categories (to be defined by the factory according to their own disciplinary
procedure):
Unauthorized absence
Tardiness
Dishonesty/Fraud
Misbehaviour
Insubordination/ refusal to take orders
Negligence/ Carelessness
Failure to comply with OHS requirements
Possible actions to be taken:
Counselling
Written warning (#)
Court procedure
116
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Chapter 10: Employee movement
Transfer, promotion, demotion and termination
Factories typically have a large workforce with different skill levels. One of the inevitable consequences
is that, at any given time, staff movement into, within and out of the work environment is bound to
happen. This chapter is intended to provide a guideline about the steps and process to be followed
for internal employee movement, which includes:
 Transfer
 Promotion
 Demotion
 Termination
1. Transfer
Employee transfers are an ideal method to encourage the development of the employee's career
within the company and fill vacant positions from internal sources. In transfers, existing employees
are given the opportunity to fill vacant positions with no change to salary/job grade. This may be done
through an internal vacancy announcement or direct assignment after reviewing documents in the
personal file of employees.
Transfers can be made for the following purposes:
+ To increase the effectiveness of the organisation
+ To increase the versatility and competency of key positions
+ To deal with fluctuations in work requirements
+ To correct incompatibilities in employee relations
To correct erroneous placement
To relieve monotony
+ To adjust workforce
Transfers, it should be noted, are not to be confused with that assignment to a less desirable position
as a consequence of a disciplinary offense. Transfers involve moving employees to fill vacant positions
which are on the same grade as the employee's previous grade due to valid reasons such as interest
from the employee and in some cases restructuring or disestablishment of a position. Transfers
occurring due to restructuring or disestablishment of a position are a last resort measure short of
termination of employment with notice as per the provisions of the current labour proclamation.
It is recommended that the factory develops its own transfer policy. The policy should be impartial
and transparent, meaning, that it should be known to all employees. In general, a good transfer policy
should at the minimum:
+ Bein writing and communicated to all employees
+ Clarify the types of transfers and the conditions under which they will be made
117
+ Clarify the procedure for transfers (how they may be initiated, how information is shared and
communicated to the employee, how the decision for approval is taken, etc. )
+ Clarify the payment that the transferee will receive
+ Clarify whether training or retraining is required
+ Clarify whether the transfer is permanent or temporary
+ Not be made arbitrarily without valid reasons
To avoid claims of problems (such as unfair staff treatment) during the implementation of a transfer
decision, it is important to have a discussion with the concerned employee about the decision and
formalise this discussion by issuing a formal letter with details of the assigned position, the effective
date of transfer and the reason for the transfer decision.
2. Promotion
A promotion is the internal advancement of an employee from one job position to another one with
a higher salary range, higher job title and higher-level job responsibilities.
Managing promotions effectively is an important way to motivate employees and drive the success of the
company. Promoting from within the current workforce provides the best opportunity for factories to
show their appreciation and commitment to the career development of their employees.
Furthermore, when employees believe that the promotions are managed effectively, they are twice
as likely to put more effort in work and to plan a long-term career within the company. " Therefore, it
is recommended a clear promotion process that considers an employee who has consistently
displayed a performance rating of proficient, highly effective or exceptional for a higher position when
opportunities for growth are available within the factory.
Transparency in Promotions
Promotions can be a delicate topic within the organisation. Therefore, it is necessary that
the process of promotions is transparent so that employees have a clear idea of how
promotions are made and, thereby, prevent situations in which employees perceive that
promotions in the company are unfair. A good understanding of the promotion process
means that all employees clearly understand:
= How the process of promotion is initiated
= What the criteria for selection are {which means they also understand what they
need to achieve and do in order to get a promotion)
= How the decision of who is promoted is made and by whom
1 Rohman, J. , Onyeagoro, C. , Bush, M. C. (2018). How You Promote People Can Make or Break Company Culture.
Harvard Business Review. Retrieved from: https: //hbr. org/2018/01/how-you-promote-people-can-make-or-break-
company-culture
118
Promotions may be initiated in different ways. A common way, however, is when the promotion is
initiated by an existing employee who aspires to fill a position of a higher job grade within the factory
through an application. To ensure a fair and transparent process of promotion, it is recommended to
follow the provisions of the internal recruitment process (please refer to Annex If of Chapter 2), whereby:
+ The existence of a promotion possibility is communicated to all eligible employees through
an internal vacancy announcement prior to or at the latest in parallel with an external vacancy
announcement
+ Employees have adequate time to apply for the position
+ Employees are clear about the criteria to be used for selection (e. g. required education,
experience, skills, past performance record) and also about the process
Similar to transfers, promotion decisions are best implemented when results of internal recruitment
process are communicated to employees through a face -to -face discussion; followed by a formal
letter both to those who are selected for the promotion and those who are not successful in their
application.
3. Demotion
Although rare in practice in the Ethiopian labour market, demotion decisions can be made in factories
in response to a pressing reason that makes it necessary to have an employee to work in a position
of a lower job grade than they were initially employed for.
Demotions can happen for different reasons. In voluntary demotions, the employee requests an
adjustment to circumstances and current needs of his/her life. In compulsory demotions, a demotion
can be a measure taken due to the employee's failure to perform at the job she/he was hired for or
promoted to; or as a measure taken as a result of restructuring in the organisation. In most of the
cases, however, the causes of demotion typically emanate from the employee's inability to perform a
significant part of their current responsibility because of:
+ A gap in the recruitment process whereby the employee has successfully completed his/her
probation period but has failed to perform to acceptable standards;
+ Atemporary partial disability /health challenge that result in reduced performance levels not
because of lack of willingness but from lack of ability that cannot be addressed by termination
of employment contract for reasons of incapacity;
+ A disciplinary offense that does not fall within the current provisions of the disciplinary
procedure and does not warrant a termination of employment contract.
Demotions are never an easy task. A demotion can be embarrassing for the employee and, if the
demoted employee was a supervisor, it might be difficult for the employee to join the people he/she
once managed. In the end, when the demotion is not voluntary, it can greatly demotivate the
employee -which is not beneficial for the company, and, in cases in which the demotion is used to
discipline the employee, it will most likely not help to fix the misconduct. Therefore, itis recommended
119
to avoid compulsory demotions. Use them as a last resort or when strictly necessary and try to take
into account all facts in the matter before reaching the decision.
Once it has been decided that a compulsory demotion is absolutely necessary, it is important to
consider that a demotion is bound to elicit an emotional reaction from an employee. Therefore, as in
all staff movement decisions, make sur to communicate in a discussion with the concerned employee
first; and then follow with formal communication through a letter.
4. Termination
Termination of employment contracts can be initiated either by the employer or the employee as per
the provisions in the Ethiopian Labour Law. Since these guidelines do not attempt to duplicate such
provisions, refer to the Labour Proclamation for more information regarding termination of
employees. In this section, aspects which are complementary to the provisions of the proclamation
and the disciplinary procedures of the guideline are presented instead.
According to the Ethiopia Labour Law Proclamation, a contract of employment:
+ May be terminated by either employee or employer according to the legal provisions in the
Labour Law or the collective agreement or the agreement between the two involved parties.
+ Shall terminate by law: on the expiry of the contract period or on the completion of the work
where the contract of employment is for a definite period/piece of work; upon the death or
retirement of the worker; when the undertaking ceases operations permanently; or when the
workers is unable to work due to partial or permanent incapacity.
+ Shall terminate by agreement: when the parties agree to the termination in writing.
In the process of termination, it is important that when the termination takes place due to poor
performance, the following measures have been considered and followed before making the decision
of terminating the employee.
+ Setting Expectations: Make sure that you set the performance expectations and
requirements (qualifications and skills) right from the beginning through a job description that
is clearly shared with the employee. Do not assume that the roles, responsibilities and
qualification requirements are clear and known or that the understanding the employee has
is the same as yours (i. e. supervisor, manager).
+ Performance Improvement Plans and Coaching: Provide ongoing coaching to discuss with
the employee the low performance: what the problems were, what solutions there might be
and develop a course of action and establish commitment. If you have provided ongoing
coaching and training but the performance has not improved, then develop a performance
improvement plan with a reasonable timeline and provide the support necessary.
+ Transfer, Demotion: If the employee still shows no improvement, the factory may consider
discussing a transfer based on other skills that the employee shows or even a demotion if it is
deemed that the employee might do better in a lower position. These are last resort options
that can be considered to try to work out a solution with the employee.
120
+ Documentation: It is necessary to document all the process with the employee: From the job
description and hiring process to formal conversations and meetings (incl. performance
review meeting, performance improvement plans, etc. ), training and development sessions
and informal conversations.
If no improvement is shown after all corrective actions and other measures, the factory may terminate
the employee. Once the decision is made, it is necessary that, regardless of the cause of termination,
employees a complete handover of all outstanding matters in regard to their current responsibilities
to another employee designated by the management of the factory. The only exception to this would
be for cases of dismissal / termination without notice whereby the mere fact of the employee being
present in the premises is detrimental to the work environment. Handover of job duties can be
accompanied by a formal handover note for office-based positions. A template for the handover note is
provided in Annex I.
In addition to the handover note, it is necessary that factories prepare clearance forms to be
completed by employees who leave their employment to ensure all outstanding matters are settled.
Some examples of matters to be settled are:
+ Appropriate handover of duties, as already mentioned above
+ Return of tools and materials for work as well as documents including IDs /Access cards
+ Update data on salary and benefits
+ Removal of letters of guarantees, if available
+ Settlement of cash advances, if any
Mandatory Work Certificate
It is frequently misunderstood that employees are not be entitled to work certificates unless
they have given an appropriate notice period.
While factories can withhold work certificates of an employee for failing to complete the
clearance process, there is little legal recourse for failing to provide the certificate for any
other reason.
= |tis, therefore, important to address the entire process of termination of employment
contract at the initial /onset of the employment relationship by way of including the topic
in the onboarding process.
Once clearance process is complete, it is mandatory that the HR department prepares a work
certificate with details mandated by the Ethiopian Labour Proclamation. Please keep in mind that this
certificate is mandatory and it is still necessary to provide one even if the termination was done by the
employee without giving proper notice.
In addition to the handover and the settlement of outstanding matters, it is highly recommended to
conduct an exit interview with the employee leaving the factory. The interview will help the factory
gain valuable feedback that can help it improve aspects of the organisation, understand what
influences retention and, based on this, devise strategies to improve it and reduce turnover.
Furthermore, employees who leave factories amicably by serving the appropriate notice period
remain to be ambassadors of their employer and can serve as sources of information to and regarding
121
potential candidates. Finally, when both parties agree, there might even be an opportunity for the
employee to join back in the future.
For the exit interview, it is recommended that it is conducted by a senior HR department staff to elicit
as much candid information as possible. If a staff from the HR department resigns, it is recommended
that a senior staff from another department conducts the interview to ensure confidentiality to the
employee. The attached exit interview form in Annex Il provides a guideline to the HR department on the
type of information to be gathered and summarised on a quarterly or at least semi-annual basis. The report
that is generated from this summary should focus on major reasons mentioned by employees for
leaving their factories. This would serve as on input to design appropriate retention mechanisms for
the future.
Things to keep in mind when conducting an exit interview
= (Create a comfortable environment and create trust: It is important to create a comfortable
environment in which the employee feels safe enough to provide honest feedback. This is,
however, not a task achieved only during the interview. If the factory does not create a
culture in which employees feel comfortable sharing ideas and critical opinions without fear
of punishment or retaliation, then it is very unlikely that they will suddenly open up during
the exit interview.
Provide reassurance: To create trust and make the employee feel comfortable to share
openly, it is important to ensure that the information from the interview is shared in a way
that keeps confidentiality (e. g. in an aggregated format) and reassure this to the employee.
Be open and listen: Listen carefully to what the employee says and be mindful of not mixing
your own ideas or assuming that you clearly understand what the employee is saying.
Ask about the positive and the negative: Ask the employee about what has led to the
employee's decision to look for a new job and leave but do not forget to ask about what is
working well too. It is crucial to know what caused the employee to become open or search
for new opportunities but it is also good to know what the organisation is doing well in order
to ensure that those aspects are kept and fostered.
122
Annex I: Handover Note
123
Annex ll: Exit Interview Form
NAME OF EMPLOYEE:
DATE OF INTERVIEW:
INTERVIEW CONDUCTED BY:
Explaining the aim of the interview
+ Confidentiality and Reporting Procedures
 Consent for Interview Process
Date of Employment -
Department/Section/Job title -
a. Yes, why?
b. No, why?
. Conditional? List conditions for re-hire
124
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Chapter 11: Communication
Good communication in the workplace is crucial to creating a positive work environment, to avoid
misunderstandings that can lead to conflicts, and to resolve these conflicts once they have arisen.
Communication is not only important inside the factories. Good communication strategies have to
be developed to keep a good relationship with the community, government institutions involved,
NGOs that might have an interest in the Industrial Park and international organizations. Moreover,
factories have to develop effective ways of dealing with conflict, as conflicts and disputes are an
inevitable aspect of every organization.
A communication strategy helps factories to define the audience(s) of the different messages they
want to send, to be precise in their messages, and to get the message across effectively.
A communication strategy involves defining:
Why? What is the purpose of the communication need?
Whe? What is the audience that needs to be reach?
What? What is the message that needs to be sent?
How? what are the right channels that need to be used?
This chapter provides useful information to develop and improve communication in factories and
IPs. It is divided in 3 sections: internal communication; stakeholder management and conflict
resolution.
1. Internal Communication
Internal Communications can be defined as the exchange of information and ideas within a factory
with the aim of creating an atmosphere of trust, mutual cooperation and respect. Although the
importance placed on internal communication differs from one organization to another, the
common goal of all internal communication can be summarized as imparting knowledge to
employees about the vision, mission, purpose of the organization and receiving their feedback on
one or more aspects of the employment relationship with the organization.
In the context of factories within the industrial park, internal communication is even more
important given the large number of employees from diverse backgrounds, the possible existence
of strong informal communication
channels and the precedence of
frequent gaps in communication that
have resulted in misunderstanding and
grievances.
Although factories may have a clear idea of what good
communication in the workplace entails in theory,
sometimes they may be unable to identify specific habits
that affect communication. A clear understanding on
what good and bad communication practices help
Effectively executed, internal factories to avoid making common mistakes.
communications can result in an
increase in commitment, trust, job satisfaction, and improved performance. Moreover, good
125
internal communications contribute to an improved corporate reputation and improved business
results as well as reduction of potential for misunderstanding and conflicts.
The correct enforcement and success of all the policies and procedures that have been identified
in this manual depend on good communication. If communication channels don't exist or are just
formal structures that are not used, if communication is not actively promoted by the top
management, if managers and middle managers lack effective communication skills and/or if
workers do not have a voice in the factory, the effective implementation of good policies is doomed
to failure.
1.1. Setting up effective internal communication structures
Factories need to set up formal and informal communication structures that can facilitate effective
communication in the workplace. This has to be a part of a real communication strategy/ plan
guided by the HR department and validated by top management. Some of the aspects to be
considered are:
1.1.1. Communication channels
There are a number of communication channels that facilitate the communication in factories.
+ Employee Handbook: short printed publication that contains concise information about
employment relationship, major policies and procedures, frequently asked questions,
reference materials and points of contact (for more information refer to Chapter 1, The HR
Policy Manual)
+ Permanent Notice Board materials: visual reminders for organizational values, existing
committees, health and safety, objectives and priorities.
+ Periodic Notice Board materials: communicating information on upcoming events,
changes, ad-hoc notices, disciplinary issues (where applicable), result of common
grievances, etc. are accomplished through periodic notice board materials
 Public Address Systems: live announcements to communicate immediate needs or
encourage a particular behaviour among employees. They can be used to provide short
educational messages, motivation as well as entertainment that promote organizational
priorities.
+ Suggestion boxes: although mainly used as a venting mechanism for grievances,
suggestion boxes have a much wider usage among employees of an organization. They
can, for example, be used not only as airing complaints but also as sources of suggestions
to improve productivity, promote health and safety and report unethical/illegal practices.
They should be placed at locations that are easily accessible e. g. entry door, canteen;
and/or contribute to confidentiality i. e. toilet room.
+ Surveys/polls: Two-way communication is vital to any effective communication strategy,
and developing formal tactics to listen to employees is essential. Employers can elicit fast
feedback through surveys and polls about specific issues (like new benefit or policy) or
general concerns.
1.1.2. Meetings and engagement sessions
Besides the above-mentioned communication channels, sessions should be regularly organized
to ensure face to face communication, develop motivation, ownership and making sure that key
messages are being understood by all employees.
126
Period
ic meetings
Annual Meeting: A meeting held during an important milestone defined by the
management of an organisation is important to communicate the yearly plan, results of
the previous year, recognize long years of service by employees or commemorate the
achievement of a particularly challenging assignment. All employees are involved in
attending this meeting. The annual meeting is best organized by a cross functional team
and may even include engagement with external stakeholders (major customers,
community leaders, regional government, civic associations, educational institutions, key
suppliers etc. )
Quarterly Employee Engagement sessions: These sessions are typically held at the
functional/departmental level and used to communicate priorities and short-term goals.
They provide ample opportunity to share results of initiatives, brainstorm solutions to
repeated challenges and reward achievements of employees during the quarter. If
applicable, competitions with regard to productivity, improved safety, perfect attendance,
team work and innovation can be included in these sessions.
Monthly check-ins /Weekly KPIs/Daily Toolbox meetings: These periodic meetings are
designed for smaller teams within departments. Nonetheless, they serve an important
purpose of solving problems at the first instance and handle grievances before they
become major issues. Supervisors/line managers lead these communication sessions,
providing feedback on performance of teams as well as individuals, accepting employee
concerns and disseminating tactical information which is going to be immediately used.
Characteristics of an effective meeting
= There is a chairperson who makes sure that the meeting is on track and steers the
discussions to the topics in the agenda.
= The meeting has a clear goal /purpose.
= The meeting has set starting and ending times, which are respected as much as
possible.
= The meeting participants have prepared for the meeting beforehand.
= There is a person who is in charge of minute-taking during the session and of
circulating the finalized document afterwards.
= The meeting is not only informational but also solution-focused.
= Decision-making methods are participatory, such as negotiation and voting.
= The meeting has a system that ensures follow-up actions.
Ad-hoc sessions
One -on-one goal setting and performance review: Although a specific timeline which
applies to all organisations is difficult to dictate, depending on the performance
management cycle of the company, goal setting and performance review meetings provide
a good opportunity to communicate specific deliverables and feedback to employees on
an individual level. The success of these communications culminates in better team
performance and cohesiveness.
Incident Management: Whenever a serious misconduct, potential or actual health and
safety incident or a major change in day-to- day operation occurs, it is important that
organisations take the lead in communicating what actually happened and the way
forward. This will prevent confusion, misunderstanding and negative employee relations.
To remain consistent and effective, a specific person within each department must be
delegated as the sole source of such information disseminated to employees.
127
Documentation of Internal Communication
Organisations have a range of options in using technology for registering and disseminating
information depending on the type of information, level of sensitivity, applicability of a particular
means of communication as well as organisational culture.
Communication which has a significant impact or affects a large proportion of employees must be
captured by the official stance of the organization as "Minutes of Meetings". All major decisions,
concerns, approvals and endorsements must be documented as per the existing documentation
procedures of the organization. Where no such procedure exists, the management of the
organization should initiate one in conjunction with legal counsel. A template of the meeting minute
can be found in Annex | of this chapter
1.1.3. Workers participation
The importance of giving a voice to workers has been highlighted in many of these guidelines
chapters. Involving workers leads to better results and better implementation of policies. Some of the
benefits of fostering workers participation are:
+ Good ideas: Workers have ideas and unique insights that are innovative and useful to
improve productivity and solve production challenges
+ Work Intelligently: workers work more intelligently if they are well informed about the
reasons and intentions of decisions
+ Solving problems: Problems can be resolved more quickly if complains are listened to and
addressed when they arise
Builds trust: communication helps to build trust between workers and managers
+ Prevents escalations: good communication helps to prevent escalations of
misunderstandings and disagreements e. g. strikes
+ Better decisions: it improves decision making regarding important issues such as working
conditions, productivity and quality
+ Leadership: it develops leadership, ownership and motivation in workers
Workers participation can involve different stages of worker involvement. Factories should aim to
continuously improve and develop the workers representation mechanisms to get the most
benefits out of it. Good communication detects problems before they can turn into a strike or
accident. It has a positive impact on working conditions and on solving problems quickly and
efficiently.
e First stage - Information sharing: workers are provided with balanced and objective
information about new developments in the factory through direct (assemblies, meetings,
individual discussions) and indirect (notice boards, flyers, newsletters) means.
+ Second stage - Consultation: the factory gathers workers opinions on different topics or
issues before they are made. In order to collect workers views, a consultative body such as
a committee with representatives of management and workers, should be established.
 Third stage - Involvement: In this stage, the management actively involves the cooperation
of workers in the decision-making process. Workplace cooperation models such as quality
12 Sustainability Agents SUSA GmbH, Prosper E2E manual. Communication and Dialogue.
128
circles, work groups, and committees are established in order to directly involve workers
or their representatives. Suitable topics include occupational health and safety (OHS),
productivity, efficiency, welfare, etc.
Fourth Stage - Joint decision making: On this stage, cooperation goes one step forwards
as workers cooperate not only in topics defined by the management, but they also raise
topics of common interest for which joint solutions are agreed on.
1.1.4. Communication skills
Communication can be simply understood as the process of using words, sounds, signs, and
behaviour to exchange information or to express ideas, thoughts, and feelings to other people.
The mere act of communicating does not guarantee successful communication. Many problems
can arise in the process of communication, creating misunderstandings and issues that lead to less
productivity, accidents and a negative environment in the workplace.
To improve communication in the workplace, it is not enough to have the proper communication
channels and structures in place. For them to work, it is necessary to develop effective
communication skills to practice effective communication.
The importance of communication skills in the factory
() Eifective communication
Communicating effectively entails not only speaking well, but also, and most importantly,
listening well. When we truly listen to others, we convey interest and respect. We are also able
to understand better the others needs and goals, which is crucial for solving problems and
having good relationships at the workplace. To listen well, it is necessary to practice active
listening and also to provide qualitative feedback to employees.
9) Active listening
e Spend more time listening than talking,
e Respond to others only after they have finished speaking.
+ Do not dominate the conversationlet others participate and engage.
 Do not evaluate/judge what you have heard until you feel that you fully understand it.
 Do not join with a defensive attitude good communication requires an open mind.
e Stick to the topic being discussed.
e Walk the listeners through your analysis and summarise your statements.
H Giving feedback
e Ask for clarifying information if you don't understand a point.
e Paraphrasetry to explain the other's statements in your own words to make sure you
understand what they are saying and feeling.
e Give positive feedback to the person you are speaking withemphasise the importance and
usefulness of his/her statements.
e Be specificgive specific examples rather than just general comments or advice.
e Be problem-oriented, not people-oriented focus on issues, i. e. refer to what the person
does rather than to what you think he/she is.
13 Sustainability Agents SUSA GmbH, Prospere2e manual. Communication and Dialogue.
129
e Be descriptive, not evaluativetry to describe what happened instead of evaluating its
goodness, badness, rightness, wrongness.
e Try to completely understand what the other person means by his/her statements.
eo Try to come to a mutual understanding.
2. Duty of care
Duty of care refers to an obligation to take reasonable care to protect another from all reasonably
foreseeable risk of harm. Employers should be aware of their legal and social responsibilities
related to their Duty of Care to all their stakeholders.
There is a general Duty of Care on employers, from a legal and corporate social responsibility
perspective. Factories have a duty of care to their workers, which means that they should take all
steps which are reasonably possible to ensure workers health, safety and wellbeing.
Duty of care can be a key factor in building trust and reinforcing commitment to workers, and can
help improve employee retention, boost productivity and pave the way for better employee
engagement.
Corporate social responsibility
is a self-regulating business model that helps a company be socially accountable  to
itself, its stakeholders, and the public.
Besides the legal expectation to do so, factories also have a moral and ethical duty not to cause,
or fail to prevent, physical or psychological injury, and must fulfil their responsibilities with regard
to personal injury and negligence claims.
In light of duty of care, factories have different ways of responsibilities, such us;
e Clearly defining jobs and undertaking risk assessments
e Ensuring a safe work environment
e Ensuring workers do not work excessive hours without rest
e Protecting workers from bullying or harassment, either from colleagues or third parties
e Protecting workers from discrimination
e Providing communication channels for workers to raise concerns
e Consulting workers on issues which concern them
 Prevent risks to health
e Ensure that machinery is safe to use
e Provide adequate first aid facilities
e Setup emergency plans
130
e Make sure that ventilation, temperature, lighting, toilet, washing and rest facilities all
meet health, safety and welfare requirements
e Check that the right work equipment is provided and is properly used and regularly
maintained
e Provide protective clothing or equipment free of charge (if risks can't be removed or
adequately controlled by any other means)
Therefore, foreseeable risks to these employees must be mitigated by an employer through an
integrated and strategic risk management strategy. This approach must be suitable to the work
context of the worker. Factories employ workers coming from different catchment areas in rural
surroundings of industry parks. More often, these workers are vulnerable to safety and security
risks due to both negligence and for a simple fact that they are unaware of their surroundings.
Factories must demonstrate they have taken steps to educate their employees about these risks
so that they are prepared to handle them should they arise. Factories must then monitor the
environment for potential hazards and update workers (including expatriates) on any
developments that could become critical incidents. Finally, employers must adequately support
and assist their employees in event of a crisis or an emergency.
Factories can follow the following steps to set up an effectively duty of care practice for their
workers.
1. Assess risks:
Assess health, safety and security risks in the locations where workers are assigned
(including outside the premises of the factory) or travel to for work.
2. Develop an integrated risk management strategy
This includes both incident crisis management plan and an ongoing Duty of Care process
so that the organization can effectively assume its Duty of Care obligations.
3. Develop policies and procedures:
Develop clear Duty of Care and travel risk management policies and procedures for
expatriate workers and international assignees.
The management of most factories in industrial parks are comprised of employees of
different nationalities from abroad. Factories are responsible for the safety and security
of these expatriates. Thus, should develop guidelines and risk management procedures
including but not limited to:
- Overall security situations in Ethiopia and in the region of the IP's location.
- Contact details and telephone trees of responsible personnel for safety and security
of employees.
Telephone trees is a phone communication line that people in an organization use to quickly notify
others in the event of an emergency. (Annex Ii)
- Recommendations and instructions on how to deal with security risks both in
industrial parks and outside the premises of IPs.
- Security standard operating procedures.
- Medical and emergency guidelines, including evacuation procedures.
- Emergency contact details
- Security risk matrix
4. Communicate and train workers:
131
Factories need to make sure that the duty of care policies and procedures and travel risk
management plan communicated throughout the organization and that workers are
informed.
5. Continuous follow-up:
Provide ongoing guidance, support and assistance when workers are in safety and
security risks and find themselves in unfamiliar situations.
6. Control and analyze:
Track and analyze workers safety and security data to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of duty of care.
3. Stakeholder management
A stakeholder is defined as anyone that can affect or is affected by what someone else is trying to achieve.
In the case of factories in Ethiopian IPs, relevant stakeholders would be clients (brands), suppliers,
the immediate community, and the government departments that collaborate with the IP or are
influenced by its functioning, the workers, and the workers families.
Of particular importance is the impact that an IP has in the communities in which they are settled.
Every aspect of a community's economy is affected by the new IP. For example, the new workers
that arrive to the area attracted by the employment opportunities offered by the IP contribute to
a high increase in the demand for transport, housing and public security, which in turn, often leads
to a rise in the prices of goods and services, which the local community might find initially hard to
adapt to. Such developments, when negative and not handled properly, can easily lead to social
unrest.
Stakeholder management included the systematic identification, analysis, planning and
implementation of actions designed to engage with stakeholders. A good stakeholder
management strategy can help the factories and the IPs in general, to prevent conflict by
establishing a good relation with the community from the very beginning.
In order to prevent social unrest and clashes with stakeholders such as the local community, it is
crucial that, from the very beginning, IPs have a clear strategy on how to communicate with and
relate to them. Such a strategy will help generate spaces of dialogue and mutual understanding,
which can prove to be critical not only for reaching clear agreements with the community and other
stakeholders, but also for preventing the escalation of conflicts and managing risks.
1.2. Steps of Stakeholder management
It is recommended that factories go through the identification of stakeholders and development
of an engagement plan as a park strategy. This will help to join efforts and to make sure that all
factories are following the same goals. Remember that the reputation of the IP affects the
reputation of all individual factories, both for the good and for the bad.
To develop an effective stakeholder management strategy, it is necessary to:
+ Identify the stakeholders: Stakeholders are anyone who can affect or is affected by a
project or action. In this case, by the development, settling and functioning of the factories
/ Ps.
132
1.3.
Understand their needs and expectations towards the industrial park: For example:
What are the different stakeholders ideas about the IP? What needs could the industrial
park cover? What needs could the IP generate in the community?
Classify stakeholders: Not all stakeholders are the same. A widespread way of classifying
them is by considering the interest (concern) stakeholders have and how much
power(authority) they have to influence the IP.
Mendelows power-interest matrix (1991) High power? high interest: ensure
that they are consulted,
collaborated with and engaged
completely
Keep Manage
satisfied closely High power/ less interest. keep
them satisfied but not go into
details frequently.
Low power / high interest: keep
Monitor Keep them informed about progress
informed and changes. They can be allies
and help prevent issues.
| Temes | Low power/ low interest: monitor
their interest levels. Engage them
with generic communication
Develop the engagement strategy: Based on the understanding developed of each
group of stakeholders, decide the frequency and the ways in which you would like to
engage them and who will be responsible for engaging each stakeholder This will be the
core of your strategy and will be the base of your engagement plan.
Take Action and manage engagement: Once the strategy is set up, it is time to take
action. Communicating and working with stakeholders to meet their needs/expectations,
addressing issues as they occur, and fostering appropriate engagement in planned
activities. A responsible team of people has to be defined and a schedule with activities as
well as contingency plans in cases of unexpected problems.
Revise and repeat: Stakeholder management is not to be done one time only. It is an
iterative activity, that has to be revised and renewed, not only to learn from previous
actions but also because stakeholders change, as well as their interest and power.
Useful principles for stakeholder engagement
Check the communication preferences and if information is being understood clearly by all
stakeholders. This will help to avoid misunderstandings and working towards common
goals.
Have a clear picture of who the stakeholders are, their own objectives and constrains and gain
their support from an early phase. It is recommended that factories engage in this activity as
soon or even before they establish themselves in a region. Previous information on
stakeholders is usually available in the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment of the
IP.
133
 Remember that stakeholders are human, and therefore their behaviour can be
unpredictable or irrational.
Invest time and resources on planning your engagement strategy. Plan with flexibility but
rigorously.
+ Relationships are key in countries like Ethiopia. /nvest time in generating trust among the
stakeholders and consider cultural values that are relevant to every region.
+ Make sure that those involved in managing stakeholders develop the necessary skills:
empathy, effective communication, negotiation skills, active listening. 14
2. Conflict management
Conflict is inevitable in all working environments. Having a good internal communication strategy
in place and sound workplace policies and procedures established are the foundation for good
workplace relations and can help a prompt and equitable settlement of labour disputes when
these arise.
However, factories have to be ready if conflicts escalate. Conflict can be either constructive or
destructive, and its effect in the organisation will be defined by the way it is handled. Conflict can
lead to the establishment of better procedures, fairer practices and more productivity in the
factory, or it can lead to increasing dissatisfaction and long periods of no production or low
productivity.
Learning to manage conflict is an integral part of any organisation, in particular in organisations
with a high number of employees such as factories. As the HR department is in charge of managing
employee relationships, the staff must have an understanding of how to handle conflict in the
factory and how to respond to an escalation of conflict.
2.1. Principles of effective conflict resolution
According to the International Labour Organisation (ILO), the following principles should be
followed by organisations for the effective resolution of disputes:
+ An effective system for processing workplace disputes is essential for sound labour
relations and the proper functioning of an organisation.
+ The parties should use their best endeavours through discussion, consultation and
negotiation to resolve any disputes which may occur, and must deal with each other in
good faith in seeking mutually acceptable solutions to disputes. They should consult each
other when they anticipate that disputes may arise.
+ Employers/ employees and their organisations should treat one another with appropriate
sensitivity and respect, and contribute towards a constructive working environment, {... )
making genuine attempts to resolve disputes at the workplace.
14 RICS Professional Guidance, UK. Stakeholder engagement. 1st edition
15 1LO. Code of good practice: Resolution of disputes at the workplace. Industrial Relations Act, Section 109. Retrieved
from: https: //www. ilo. org/dyn/natlex/docs/ELECTRONIC/104362/127272/F1823904484/SW7104362. pdf on
30/04/2019.
134
+ The processing of a dispute must not prejudice an employee's employment in any way. The
parties must recognise each other's rights to utilise available systems and procedures to
resolve disputes that occur.
+ An employee must be given the opportunity to be assisted by a fellow employee in
processing a dispute at the workplace i. e. worker representative.
+ Employers, employees and their organisations should attempt to deal with problems
quickly and as close to their source as possible.
+ Employer, employees and their organisations must address the root causes of conflict, and
not just the outward symptoms of the problems.
+ Employers, employees and their organisations must recognise the extent to which the
nature of the dispute influences the suitability to different dispute resolving mechanisms.
+ Employers, employees and their organisations must recognise the need for an effective
dispute management system, to deal with all disputes that may arise.
2.2. Types of conflict in the workplace
Employment disputes are divided into two categories: individual and collective disputes. In general,
individual disputes are those involving single individuals, and collective disputes involve groups of
workers. 1 The understanding of this categories should be guided by the labour proclamation of
each country.
The Ethiopian labour proclamation defines a labour dispute as any controversy arising between a
worker and an employer or between trade union and employers in respect to the application of law,
collective agreement, work rules, employment contract or customary rules, and also any disagreement
arising during collective bargaining or in connection with collective agreement. Individual labour
disputes are to be handled by regular courts, collective disputes require special conciliation and
arbitration bodies before being dealt with by regular courts for a final decision, if necessary. "
According to Wubie, the differentiation between A legal advisor should always be involved
individual and collective disputes is not fm the beginning of any conflict, this will
straightforward. The main criteria that defines it ~~ hep the factory to understand the legal
are the effects of the dispute: if they are limited to nature of the dispute and the right
the disputing worker (or workers) it shall be mechanisms to rely on.
considered as an individual dispute, whereas
disputes whose effects transcend individual spheres and affect the joint interest of employees shall
be collective labour disputes.
2.3. Conflict prevention
18 1LO (2007) Collective Dispute Resolution through Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration: European and ILO
Perspectives. High-Level tripartite Seminar on the settlement of labour disputes through mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and labour courts. Cyprus, October 18th  19th, 2007
7 Hiruy Wubie (2013) The Settlement of Individual and Collective Labour Disputes under Ethiopian Labour Law. In E-
Journal of International and Comparative LABOUR STUDIES. Volume 2, No. 1 January 2013. Published by Adapt,
International School of Higher Education in Labour and Industrial Relations.
135
Conflict prevention is the object of a wide range of policies and initiatives and it is based on
effective communication strategies. It aims to avoid the violent escalation of a dispute. Guidelines
to prevent conflict include:
136
+ Have acommunication policy in place to ensure that relevant information is made available
to the workforce. Management decisions that are relevant to workers have to be effectively
communicated, at all times.
 Have several communication channels available and define which will be used for which
information.
+ Disclose all information about agreements
with the workers representation and
conflict resolutions between groups.
Factories should try to solve conflict
internally and prevent escalation to
instances outside the factory. This is to be
done by encouraging dialogue among
stakeholders. Dialogue is a process where
the participants commit to listen, reflect
and question with a curious mind-set in
order to seek a shared understanding.
 Give workers representatives the
opportunity to use the communication
channels under an agreed policy that
defined to what extent and under which
circumstances they can do so.
 New solutions found for conflicts should be
incorporated into the relevant policies and procedures to make sure that they contribute
to the development of the factory.
2.4. Mediation in the factory
Sometimes informal conflict resolution is not enough. When negotiation is not working out, it is
important to know when to step away from a conflict situation and ask someone more skilled to
mediate. The key difference between negotiation and mediation is that in negotiation, the parties
involved work out their own agreement. In mediation, they have the support of the third party, the
mediator, to help them come to an agreement. A mediator is a neutral third party who facilitates
the mediation process by guiding the negotiations between the parties so that the parties may
arrive at mutually acceptable solutions.
The mediator must be highly objective and must remain neutral throughout all the mediation
process. A high degree of confidentiality is required for all aspects of the mediation process. The
work involves giving all parties an equal opportunity to be heard and to respond, ensuring that
negotiations take place in a fair and balanced manner, helping each party to identify his or her own
needs, evaluate options and develop solutions. These tasks must be executed diligently and
independent of influence or bias and in accordance with the systems and procedures in place at
the mediation centre.
Qualities of a Mediator
= Acceptance of individual differences
= Ability to analyse
= Ability to recognize and manage power
= Strong communication skills
= Active listening skills
= Summarising skills
= Ability to articulate and identify the issues and interests of the parties
= Ability to control the process without dominating the parties
= Ability to generate movement in the discussion of the dispute
137
Annex I: Meeting Minutes Template
138
Annex II: Typical emergency telephone tree
Management 1 Management 2 Management 3 Management 4
In the event the Senior Management is unavailable, Management 1 will be responsible for
implementing the Senior Management phone tree. In the event a management is unavailable, the next
member of staff down on the list is responsible for implementing the team phone tree.
1 Hl |
1. [Manageri]
2. [Managerl]
3. [Managerl]
4. [Managerl]
2.
3.
4.
139
140
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Chapter 12: The Way forward - HR Guidelines implementation
Chapter 12: The Way forward - HR Guidelines
implementation
1. The Checklist
This checklist is meant to help factories to monitor the implementation of the basic
recommendations described throughout the manual. It focusses on the deliverables and
responsibilities of the HR department.
HR manual (Chapter 1)
Remarks
J Minimum content completed
Business environment
Business ethics
Recruitment and selection
Onboarding
Training and development
Performance management
Compensation
Grievance handling
Disciplinary procedure
Staff movement
Health and safety
Emp ny enp Enh (npn jun ey (np {n(n (n(n p .
Employee records
Translated to local language
Reviewed by legal advisor
Selected policies posted on notice boards
HR Manual easily accessible for HR staff and management
[ERR [En a
Employee handbook available for all employees
Recruitment and selection (Chapter 2)
U Job descriptions available and upgraded
[J Recruitment documentation completed (personnel file)
141
Onboarding plan completed
Onboarding provided for every new position (incl. internal
promotion)
Soft skills included in onboarding
Oe Oe
Onboarding checklist completed
Training needs assessment completed
Annual training plan completed
Training evaluations being applied
Oo |is
Adult training methods being applied
U Performance management system implemented for staff (all
steps completed)
U Performance management system implemented for operators
(all steps completed)
[J Training on performance management system for supervisors &
managers
U Salary slips are being issued to all employees
U Salary, benefits and allowances communication strategy
established and implemented
[J Attendance tracking implemented
U Leave tracking implemented
[J Action plans to remedy unauthorized absenteeism implemented
142
Grievance procedure implemented
Grievance procedure communicated to workers
Worker representatives involved in grievance handling
Feedback on status of grievance being provided
O|Oooe|s
Grievance log developed and in use
UJ Disciplinary procedure implemented
U Disciplinary procedure communication strategy established and
implemented
[1 Procedure followed for all cases of Ll Transfer
employee movement [1 Demotion
[1 Promotion
[1 Termination
0 Complete documentation for every case of employee movement
U Meetings regularly held with factory staff U other
and workers departments
[J worker
representatives
U Annual meeting organized (all employees)
Once the checklist is completed, the work is not over! Keep improving the policies and procedures,
implementing all the recommendations in the manual and working towards advancing satisfaction,
retention and productivity in the factory.
143
2. The HR Scorecard
Effective measurement systems encourage a clear, consistent and shared view on how factories
implement their strategy in each department and at each level. It helps factories to focus on what
is important, what is happening, the reasons why this is happening and to foresee what might
happen in the future. Relevant and good quality data is key to make strategic decisions.
A scorecard is a metric used in strategic management
to identify and improve various internal functions of a
company and their outcomes. It be can used to
measure and provide feedback to each department on
how they are working towards the factory strategic
A scorecard is a tool that provides a
comprehensive measure of how the
organization progresses towards the
achievement of its strategic goals.
An HR Scorecard allows the HR Department to be able to visualize and show the value it creates in
the factory. Unlike dashboards, the most common metrics used in the factory, scorecards have a
focus on strategy and long-term goals.
Dashboard versus Scorecard
o Used for monitoring and performance o Used for performance management and
measurement strategy
o Based on daily metrics o Based on Key Performance Indicators
(metric plus target that we want to
achieve)
Updated in real time o Updated periodically
Focus on operational short-term goals o Focus on strategic long-term goals
Helps to visualize performance to o Helps to visualize a strategy, identify why
understand the current state something is happening and what can be
done
The HR scorecard is a method for the HRD to position itself as a strategic partner with line
managers and executives. The metrics help to demonstrate how HR activities impact profitability,
how HR is a source of competitive advantage for the factory. Internally, an HR scorecard helps
understand the big picture and ensures that everyone is moving towards the same direction.
2.1. What to measure?
In order to define the measures that will give meaningful information on the strategic role of HR in
our factories, the department should focus on their deliverables and overall impact on the factory
operations.
To do so, HR departments must identify:
+ Key Result Areas (KRA): the fundamental areas of the outcome for which a department is
accountable. Examples of KRA for the HR department are: recruitment and selection,
onboarding, training and development, performance management.
+ Key Performance Indicators (KPIs): quantifiable measure that gauges the performance of
the department in quantitative terms. KPIs can be grouped according to the KRA to which
they are related. Examples of KPI for the HRD are: turnover rate, average time to recruit,
number of grievances successfully solved internally.
144
It is not possible nor efficient for a factory to try to quantify all the aspects of their strategy and
outcomes. However, this shouldn't be a reason not to measure the key dimensions of HR strategy.
2.2. Setting up Targets and Checking Performance
After the definition of the KRAs and KPIs, factories need to set up targets for each KPI selected.
In order to define targets, factories should start by measuring the actual value that the KPI has.
Later, they should define targets that are both
ambitious and achievable. For this, historical data (if
available) or external sources can be used to provide
A target is the desired level of
performance that aims to be achieved,
as measured by the KPIs.
information to set up clear and achievable targets.
Whereas targets should be time-bounded, not all of them have to refer to the same timeframe. For
example, the KPI average time in training per employee is usually evaluated in a yearly basis,
while turnover rate is usually done monthly.
2.3. How to implement the HR Scorecard?
This chapter provides a template for factories in Ethiopian IPs to track the most relevant KPIs for
the performance of the HR department. Factories can use the template as a basis to then establish
their own HR scorecards, that should evolve in complexity along with the development of the HR
department's expertise and functions.
Implementing new practices in a factory can be challenging, but the benefits it brings are worth
the effort. Some tips to facilitate the adoption and effective use of the HR Scorecard are:
+ Get the HR staff involved and train them on HR metrics
+ Establish clear responsibilities and deadlines for each KPI
+ Take small steps: start with a few KPIs per KRA. Don't over measure, make sure that the
investments in measuring are worth their benefit.
+ Encourage thinking beyond numbers: What are the causes behind the data?
+ Be persistent on the application of the HR scorecard
+ Develop and include in the HR scorecard the measures planned in order to reach the
targets.
145
2.4. HR scorecard for factories in Ethiopian IPs
Absenteeism rate
Turnover rate
Productivity rates
Retention rate of high
performance
Percentage of new hires
achieving satisfactory rating
at first appraisal
Average time to recruit
Number of recruits that
completed probation period
Number of onboarding days
Percentage of new recruits
that completed onboarding
Average number of training
days per year per staff
days per year per operator
Percentage of employees
with job descriptions
with individual performance
plan
Percentage of workers with
performance appraisal in a
period of time
Percentage of departments
who completed all their
performance appraisals on
time
Percentage of grievances
successfully solved internally
Number of disciplinary
offences registered during a
Unauthorized leave rate
Formulas
Number of unauthorized leave days/Number of working days
(in a determined period of time)
Number of voluntary turnover/Average number of employees
Average number of employees= (Number of employees at the
beginning of period of time + Number of employees at the end
of a period of time) /2
Percentage of employees who meet productivity targets
146
Number of voluntary turnover of high-performance
employees/Average number of high-performance employees
Average TTR: Sum of all TTR / Number of TTR {in a determined
period of time)
TTR: Date of sending job offer letter- Date of request of
employee by a department
(Number of unauthorized leave days/Number of total working
days) * Number of employees
147
HUMAN RESOURCE GUIDELINES | Annex 1: Centralised Services in Industrial Parks
Annex 1: Centralised Services in Industrial
Parks
1. Centralised Services in Industrial Parks
A centralized service is a service that is provided to a cluster of different entities, provided that they
share a common interest in the service provided. In the case of industrial parks, centralized
services refer to those that are taken out of the sphere of the individual factories to start being
provided to them all as a whole by one or more providers under the same standards.
The development of industrial parks (IPs) benefits investors, communities and individuals in
multiple ways. Some of these benefits include:
e IPs offer employment opportunities to a large number of people, who usually come from
impoverished areas and have limited access to jobs;
e They foster the development of underdeveloped areas and promote balanced regional
growth, contributing to regional and national economic development;
e They provide an institutional framework, a physical and social infrastructure, and modern
services to factories, giving them a competitive advantage in the country where they
operate.
To reap these benefits, however, it is necessary to ensure the success of the factories part of the
IPs. And, while factories largely determine their own success by defining their own production
goals, financial objectives and internal structures and by responding to their individual needs, their
success is also linked to the bigger framework in which they find themselves, namely, the IP. As
most of the challenges the factories face (such as attracting and retaining workforce, maintaining
a good relationship with stakeholders and ensuring good working conditions to their employees)
are often challenges shared by other factories in the IP (and in many cases in other IPs as well), the
IP can help factories tackle these challenges by centralising social services and resources, i. e.
sharing the provision and management of key services that are delivered to all the workforce of an
* Increasing cost-effectiveness of social services, as joint efforts allow to provide better
quality services with lesser resources.
 Providing a level platform of minimum social services and standards, thereby helping
to avoid multiple and mismatching standards in IPs
 Preventing social and labour standards from being entangled into the logic of
18 UNIDO (2016). Global Assessment of Eco-industrial Parks in Developing and Emerging Countries. Retrieved from:
https: //www. unido. org/sites/default/files/2017-02/2016_Unido_Global_Assessment_of_Eco-
Industrial_Parks_in_Developing_Countries-Global_RECP_programme_0. pdf on 01/05/2019
148
+ Contributing to fostering social peace with the communities around the IP, as sharing
a joint strategy to manage community relationships contributes to protecting the
reputation of the IP and of each factory.
 Preventing unrest with the workforce, as they receive standard social services that
 Enabling the factories to focus on their core business, production and quality, as
helps to significantly reduce the time and resources that each factory would require to do
so individually.
The structure and responsibilities for the centralization of services is to be developed by each IP. It
is recommended that the main management functions are under the responsibility of an
association of all factory tenants i. e. investors association.
In the next sections, a number of interventions for offering centralised services in Ethiopian IPs are
introduced. These interventions are intended to help IPs and factories tackle some of the most
common and pressing challenges faced by both. It should be highlighted, however, that, for these
interventions to be effective, factories and the IP need to have a common understanding of current
challenges, to set clear goals and to channel efforts into joint sustainable strategies.
2. Management of Stakeholders
IPs have a significant impact in the communities in which they are settled. Almost every aspect of
a community's economy is affected by the new IP. For example, one of the consequences often
observed after the introduction of an IP, is a change in the living conditions in the surrounding
areas. Attracted by the employment opportunities offered by the IP, thousands of workers from
both nearby and faraway regions flock into the area -increasing the demand for transport, housing
and public security. This, in turn, often leads to a rise in the prices of goods and services, to which
the local community might find initially hard to adapt.
+ Jointly identify the stakeholders. Stakeholders are anyone who can affect or is affected
by a project or action. In this case, by the development, settling and functioning of the IP.
 Understand their needs and expectations towards the industrial park.
e Classify stakeholders. Not all stakeholders are the same. A widespread way of classifying
them is by considering their power, interest in and how they are affected by the IP.
eo Develop the engagement strategy. Based on the understanding developed of each
core of your strategy and will be the base of your communication plan (more information
on this topic can be found in Chapter 11: Communication).
149
Some ways in which you stakeholders can be engaged are:
e Stakeholder Community Forum: The forum includes relevant local authorities and
organisations and is steered by a professional mediator. Meetings should take place
regularly and at the end of each meeting there should be decisions on tangible outcomes.
To ensure the success of this medium, it is necessary to assess and review the forum's work
regularly.
 Community Activities: Activities such as guided visits to the IP, special events at the IP can
help the community to get to know the IP.
e Venues for Dialogue: Venues to engage in dialogue (which may be of the scale of the
stakeholder community forum but can also be much smaller) to share concerns and work
on solutions.
3. Medical Services
The health of workers is inevitably linked to their productivity and workplace satisfaction. Health
risks at the workplace (such as heat, dust, hazardous chemicals, psychological stress) and related
to the workplace (such as long commutes) can affect the physical and psychological health of
workers. This, in turn, can lead not only to a decrease in productivity due to e. g. more sickness
days and less efficiency, but also generate a general feeling of dissatisfaction among workers as
they perceive the workplace to have a negative impact on their level of well-being.
To counter some of the health risks posed by the workplace and the negative consequences that
can arise from those risks, it is necessary to apply measures for protecting workers health.
Research has shown that workplace health initiatives help reduce absenteeism related to sickness
by 27% and healthcare costs for companies by 26%. " Healthcare initiatives should, however, not
be limited to improving working conditions but also to ensuring access to preventive healthcare
and good-quality, timely treatment. Such initiatives can be taken individually by the factories but
also in a centralised manner through the IP. As mentioned above, however, having a centralised,
shared facility can help factories to save time and costs while still allowing them to provide high-
quality medical care for its workers.
The centralised medical centre should be adequate to the size of the IP and provide the following
services:
- Standard medical treatment and medication
- Preventive health services such as educational campaigns for disease prevention (e. g. STs
or common illnesses among workers such as kidney disease due to dehydration),
reproductive health (incl. the provision of sanitary products such as sanitary pads for
women) and nutrition.
- Emergency medical services, including ambulance pickups and transport to nearby
hospitals, for situations that are beyond the capacities of the clinic.
- First aid training for factory staff and providing ongoing advice to factory management on
nutritional requirements (incl. quantity, quality and frequency) of meals provided to the
WHO (2017). Protecting Workers Health. Retrieved from: https: //www. who. int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/protecting-workers'-health
150
To ensure the sound operation and effectiveness of the medical centre, it is imperative that
standard procedures are developed for all services provided and communicated to the
management of each of the factories in the IP. Factories should be well aware about the
procedures to be able to clearly provide instructions to workers and to the management in charge
of dispatching workers to the centre in case of illness, injury or emergency and of coordinating
healthcare campaigns and health-related training. Communication should, however, not be limited
to the procedures. The centre should provide regular reports on sickness and accident rates to the
factories as well so that they can use them for their social auditing and other stakeholder
communication purposes.
Finally, to ensure the good quality of the services, strict standards and guidelines should be
developed and monitored by public authorities, the investor associations or a commission set up
for this purpose. This will help to guarantee a safe and healthy environment for the patients and
keep track on the technical performance, services offered, effectiveness of care and the physical
infrastructure of the clinic.
4. Meals
Workers nutrition is very important in the factory context. Good nutrition levels lead to gains in
productivity and worker morale; prevention of incidents such as mass fainting, and a reduction of sick
days. In the case of manual workers, it is especially important that their diet satisfies their high
caloric intake needs. However, the reality is that many workers are unable to consume enough
calories to perform the strenuous work expected of them. Workers often find themselves with little
money by the middle of the month, which makes it difficult for them to buy sufficient food. In some
cases, workers do not count with the facilities necessary to store or cook food at home. Workplace
meal programmes help address some of these difficulties and prevent nutritional deficiencies and
diseases (such as anaemia), which lead to chronic fatigue, tiredness, weakness, difficulty
concentrating on work and, consequently, low productivity.
Factories can significantly benefit from a workplace meal programme. Providing at least one meal
to workers can greatly contribute not only to avoid the negative consequences of malnutrition on
production, but also to enhance the overall health and well-being of workers. Unlike cash food
allowances, meal programmes prevent workers from spending the money to address other needs
and also ensure that at least one meal consumed by workers meets nutritional needs. In this way,
the meal programme helps enhance workers health and reduce the instances of workers
experiencing health problems -such as feeling weak and fainting- at work.
As with other services mentioned previously, factories can organise this service individually and
provide meals to the workers in their own canteen. However, a centralised meal service can be
beneficial for the factories as it;
- Lowers costs.
- Limits the amount of effort required by factory management.
- Ensures that meals meet caloric and nutritional requirements by engaging professionals in
the development of the menu.
The centralised meal programme can be organised in different ways. One of the most
uncomplicated ways, however, is by arranging a central kitchen that delivers the food to meal
151
rooms either for each shed or for sharing by a number of sheds- in shifts. This would avoid the
organisational complexity of having one main canteen in which all workers in different factories
within the IP go for a meal at different times; and of delivering food to numerous individual factory
canteens.
In order to have a successful meal programme, however, it is absolutely mandatory to ensure that,
in addition to nutritious and sufficient, the food provided by the canteen is safe. Therefore, it is
imperative that the meal programme includes a supervision component that entails regular and
spontaneous checks to monitor hygiene, condition of facilities, quality of supplies and prepared
food, and the canteen services themselves.
5. Transport
Transport is an essential service that can greatly affect the quality of life of workers. Lack of safe,
reliable and affordable public transportation systems and the long commutes from the workers
houses to the IP can make transport one of the biggest challenges for workers. /f left unaddressed,
the deterioration in the well-being of workers caused by the lack of adequate transport or exhausting
commutes can result not only in higher tardiness and absenteeism rates, but also, ultimately, in higher
turnover rates.
To address this problem, it is necessary to provide workers with a reliable transport service to
commute to work. Providing transport can help minimise the stress felt by workers who need to
adapt to the urban lifestyle. It can reduce tardiness and absenteeism as workers can rely on the
factory's buses to come on time in all weather conditions. It can make it easier for workers to take
overtime hours when needed as they do not have to worry about availability of transport at late
hours. And, finally, it can also help protect workers by ensuring that transport meets safety
As with other services, factories can choose to either organise their own transport or opt for taking
part in a centralised transport service at the IP level. Some of the benefits that a centralised
transport unit brings are:
- It makes it easier to combine the service with vehicle maintenance shop -which could
ensure that factory cars/buses are fully compliant with safety requirements and follow
standard procedures.
- It lowers costs through collective tendering and sub-contracting process.
- ltrequires less effort from factory management.
6. Subsidised Shops
Factory workers usually have limited income and cash-at-hand to buy goods that help them meet
their most basic needs. As a consequence, they are often only able to buy small amounts of food
and basic goods. Furthermore, as some of them also lack the facilities at home for the safe storage
of food and other items, they are unable to purchase larger amounts, which would potentially allow
them to save money (as the smaller the unit the higher the price per item). Lastly, when IPs are
developed in a region and a mass of workers arrive there, it is common for prices to rise as
152
businesses speculate with the costs of goods. This makes it even harder for workers to have access
to good and nutritious food.
To tackle this problem, IPs can offer food at cost or wholesale prices in so-called fair shops. This
would enable workers to access affordable, fairly-priced and good quality basic goods and, thereby,
allow them not only to have food security but also save money. In addition, by ensuring that the
food is of good quality, fair shops could help prevent sickness among workers due to the
consumption of low-quality food. Ultimately, by increasing the well-being of workers through
enhanced food security and increased possibilities for saving money, these shops can be a big
incentive for workers to stay in the factory and can make the option of working in the IP more
attractive to the community.
Building and setting up shops and infrastructure of subsidised shops should be done by IPDC,
whereas the management and operation of the shops can be done in different ways:
Option 1. Once price of goods is fixed through thorough assessments and market analyst that
involves workers, an open tendering can be conducted to select retailors to occupy and operate
shops.
Option 2. Subsidized consumer cooperatives can be contracted to provide goods and food items
for fair prices.
To ensure that subsidised shops function correctly, it is necessary to have clear and strict
regulations. For example, limits on the amount of goods that can be sold per worker should be
established in order to avoid reselling and regulations to ensure the quality of food to be offered
should be developed to avoid massive illness. The regulation should include not only the quota pro
workers and quality assurance measures but also directions regarding keeping and replenishing
stock, selecting suppliers and determining sale prices.
7. Training
Training is a crucial part in the Ethiopian manufacturing industry. Training prepares the workforce
with the knowledge and skills necessary to perform well in their role. Benefits of proper training
(as explained in more detail in Chapter 3 Employee onboarding and Chapter 4 Training and
development) include improvements in production efficiency and decreases in absenteeism and
turnover rates. However, factories sometimes lack the resources -time, skills and budget- to
provide relevant, high-quality training to their workforce.
IPs can help factories with this challenge. Although technical training is highly industry and factory-
specific, training on general technical skills, life skills and soft skills (incl. managerial skills) are
necessary for employees in all kinds of factories and can, therefore, be centralised in an IP training
centre. Through centralised training services, an IP training centre would enable factories to
provide training to their staff on core topics with considerably less costs and efforts. It would count
with skilled staff that possesses expertise not only on the different topics at hand but also on
training delivery methods and adult education. The centre would have structured programs and
diverse material to ensure the development of relevant skills in workers, supervisors and
management. Workers, staff and managers of all factories within the IP would be trained in topics
such as leadership, team building, labour law, compliance, and OHS, among others. It would be
153
located in within the IP premises and have a dedicated training office. For special cases, the delivery
of training could be arranged in each factory.
Factories gain added benefit from centralized training services because;
- Pre-planned training programs make it easier for factories to design developmental plans
per employee.
- Training costs decreased, as factories can now send only the relevant workers to take part
in specific training types.
- Cost and effort of training acquisition process is eliminated.
- Factories can plan operational activities and training simultaneously, as the centralized
training service will accommodate similar trainings in different timelines.
In order to create ownership and maximize the added value of the training centre, design of
training programs and modules should include inputs of factories management. A competitive
bidding and selection of training providers should be conducted for the management and
operation of the training centre.
As beneficiaries and major players of the training program design, factories are to be responsible
for the cost of the training services, whereby governmental organizations such as IPDC, along with
the tenants association can set up the training centre and infrastructure.
8. Counselling
Many of the workers who start working in manufacturing facilities come from rural areas. Most of
them are young females, and it is usually the first time that they are away from their families and
villages. Dealing with the challenges posed by starting a new job in a new environment (i. e. the
factory) can be stressful by itself, but, in many instances, workers have to face difficulties related
to having to adapt to a new living situation that entails not only adjusting to an urban lifestyle but
also being in a new place without a social support network (incl. family members). Moreover, even
though it is often invisibilised, harassment and abuse are common in many factories and workers
feel that they have to deal with this themselves as they are too afraid of losing their jobs or of the
consequences that speaking up can have to their reputation. Finally, it is not uncommon that
factory workers are stereotyped and marginalised by the community. Faced with such a cocktail of
challenges, workers often find it extremely difficult to deal with their new life situation and, as a
result, quit the factories to return to their homes after a few months of work.
Providing counselling, both about work and personal issues, is a valuable tool to ease the situation
of the workers and help them to deal with their daily problems. Although it may not always be able
to solve the problems faced by the workers, it can offer
much needed psychological support and thereby
alleviate some of the feelings of frustration and being
overwhelmed experienced by the workers. This can help
to increase the sense of well-being among workers and,
in this way, help factories to increase retention.
It is highly encouraged that factories
in IPs share knowledge and jointly
address common needs, work
together towards joint solutions and
develop new ways of offering better
services to their workers while saving
Although factories can offer counselling services on their ~~ costs.
own, centralising counselling services have the added
benefit of allowing factories to offer qualified professional support (i. e. support by professional
154
psychologists with experience in working with women and workers or vulnerable groups) to the
workers at reduced costs.
9. Social and Environmental Standards
Factories can benefit from setting up structures to share knowledge and efforts to comply with
social and environmental-related national laws and international standards. Although this
guideline itself is a tool to provide a common base and guide for factories in IPs in regards to social
standards and HR processes, the IP can further support factories by offering a centralised service
that provides advice on how to apply regulations and standards to ensure compliance. The service
can also perform audits to monitor implementation and make sure that all factories are on the
right track. In case that factories are facing challenges in applying the certain standards or want to
implement additional standards, they could also request assistance from the centralised service.
10. Monitoring of Centralised Services
Regardless of whether it is for transport, meals or any other of the services proposed, monitoring
and evaluation schemes have to be developed to ensure the quality of the services and guarantee
transparency. These schemes can be developed by an external consultant or NGO, hired by the
tenant's association.
Moreover, in the case of hiring contractors, a competitive bidding process should be developed
and followed. The bidding should, needless to say, observe the highest standards of ethics. In order
to guarantee a fair and transparent bidding process, rules such as excluding all bidders with a
history of corruption or fraudulent practices as well as those who have personal links with those
preparing, checking the documents or making the selection should be in place. Contractors hired
must have experience in offering the service and have with qualified personnel and financial
capacity. Clear objectives have to be given to hired contractors and formal communication
channels have to be established as well as regular instances for information exchange. Finally, calls
for contractors should be done periodically (i. e. every 1 or 2 years) and the performance of the last
contractor should be thoroughly evaluated.
11. Continuous Efforts Towards Shared Benefits
This annex presented only some of the services that could be centralised and shared by all factories
in IPs. Naturally, it is also possible for factories to provide these social services individually.
However, provided that well-defined standards are followed, offering these services jointly bring
benefits that exceed those achieved by factories working separately. Some of these benefits
include increased cost effectiveness, high standard levels of social benefits provided, and, overall,
a good reputation of the IP within the community.
For this reason, it is highly encouraged that factories in IPs share knowledge and jointly address
common needs, work together towards joint solutions and develop new ways of offering better
services to their workers while saving costs. The better the whole IP performs, the more competitive
155