Rt en pc Be lle Bt ae be Be Bel Bn

ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION
ECOMOMIC OPPORTUNITIES PROGRAM (EOP)
INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING (IPF)
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR'S REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 07 JULY 2021
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES PROGRAM
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATION
IPF Investment Project Financing
EIC Ethiopian Investment Commission
IDA International Development Association
BOLSA Bureau of Labor and Social Affairs (regional)
PCU Program Coordinating Unit
ARRA Agency for Refugees and Returnee Affairs
EPP Employment Promotion and Protection
PES Public Employment Service
DFID U. K. Department for International Development
ETB Ethiopian Birr
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR'S REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEM ENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS :
PART 1
PART 2
PART 3
PART 4
PART 5
INTRODUCTION
id Background
1.2 Organizational objectives
1.3 Audit objectives
1.4 Audit scope
1.5 Audit methodology
1.6 Results of the audit
STATEMENT OF MANAGEMENT'S RESPONSIBILITIES
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
3.1 Independent auditors report
3:2 Statement of Receipt and Expenditure
3% Statement of Financial Position
3.4 Summary of Activity in the Designated Account
3c Notes to the financial statements
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON COMPLIANCE
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL
Pages
Ah WW wow
FOR THE YEAR ENED 07 JULY 2021
1
1.
1.2
1.3
1.4
Background
International Development Association - IDA (World Bank) to the Federal Democratic Republic of
Administration for Refugee and Returnee Affairs (ARRA) and regional Bureau of Labor and Social Affairs
(BOLSA) for proper execution of the Program fo
The annual budget will be prepare in line with the below three components of the IPF
Component 1: Program implementation support to the EIC (US$8 million)
Component 2: Operations Management capacity support to ARRA (US$3 million)
Component 3: Employment Promotion and Protection (EPP) for refugees and support to Public
Employment Services (PESs) for Ethiopians (US$14 million)
Organizational Objectives
The project aims at enhancing the capacities of EIC, Administration for Refugee and Returnee Affairs and
Regional Bureau of Labor and Social Affairs (BOLSA) for proper execution of the Program for Results
where capacity-building and institutional strengthening measures will be financed through the
Investment Project Financing.
Audit objectives
The objective of the audit is to express an opinion on the Project financial statements of EOP-IPF for the
year ended 07 July 2021. The audit includes but not limited to the following tasks:
Give comments and observations on the a
ccounting records, systems and controls that were examined
during the course of audit;
Identify specific deficiencies or areas of weakness in systems and controls,
for their improvement;
Report on the degree of compliance of each of the financial covenants in the financing agreement and
give comments, if any, on internal and external matters affecting such compliance
Determine whether the management and financial systems, including internal controls, within the
components are adequate for efficient and prudent management of funds;
and make recommendations
Comment on the use of funds vis a vis a
pproved budgets in relation to the agreement between the
organization and donors;
Assess the compliance with administrativ
e/legal/fiscal issues regarding local employees contracted under
the organization; and
Recommend possible improvements and/or actions in
any area on financial management and especially
areas where weaknesses were noted.
Audit scope
The audit scope required us to carry out sufficient audit steps and procedures to ensure that the audit
objectives were met for the year ended 07 July 2021. Details of the steps and procedures are described
in note 1.5.
1.5
1.5.1
1.5.2
1.5.6
Audit Methodology
We conducted the audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and in compliance with
the accounting policies and agreed terms between Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) and IDA
(International Development Association - World Bank).
Internal controls
We have evaluated significant internal controls to obtain sufficient understanding of the design of
relevant controls, policies and procedures and whether they have been in operation during the period
under review.
Compliance with terms agreement and applicable laws and regulations
We have reviewed, assessed and reported on compliance with the terms and conditions of the
agreements.
Representations by grantees
We have obtained specific written representations from management.
Contractual obligations
Appraised relevant documents such as agreements with creditors;
Verified compliance of organization's expenditures with relevant terms of agreements as well as all the
applicable rules;
Verified compliance of the recipient with the terms and conditions of the agreement with the creditors;
and
Verified timely submission of interim and audited financial reports for the creditor as stipulated in the
agreement.
Receipts and disbursements
Verified compliance with the disbursements and procurement procedures set up for the organization.
Implementation
Examined whether the expenditures are classified in accordance with the budget.
Reviewed bank statements and other relevant books of accounts and assessed whether they show a
complete view of the income received and expenditure incurred;
Verified and confirmed that all commitments are genuine, with the relevant agreements disclosed within
the financial records and are for the pursuance of agreed Project objectives; and
Examined a representative sample of payments transactions including accuracy and completeness of
records.
Other income sources
Established whether other income generated by the project, such as sales of
items, exchange gains,
etc. ; have been used in furtherance of the project's objectives.
Results of the audit
Summary of results by audit objectives
Reach an opinion as to the validity of the financial statements.
In our opinion, the financial statements give a true and fair view of the sources and uses of funds in
accordance with the funding agreement and accounting policies stated in note 3.5.
Report on the financial management and internal control findings
We reviewed the internal control structure and concluded that the system was adequate to meet the
needs of the program. We have not observed reportable deficiency or material weaknesses on the
internal control of the project.
2
STATEMENT OF MANAGEMENTS RESPONSIBILITIES
The Management of Economic Opportunities Program - Investment Project Financing is responsible for
the preparation of the financial statements for each financial year which gives a true and fair view of the
Project as at the end of the year and of the operating results for that year. The management of the
project is required to keep proper accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy at any
time the financial position of the project. Management is also responsible for safeguarding the assets of
the project.
The management is responsible for the preparation of financial statements that gives a true and fair
view in accordance with the funding agreement between Ethiopian Investment Commission and
International Development Association and the accounting policies stated in Note 3.5 of this report and
for such internal controls as the management determines are necessary to enable the preparation of the
project financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
The management accepts responsibility for the financial statement which has been prepared using
appropriate accounting policies supported by reasonable and prudent judgments and estimates. The
management believes the project's financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the
financial affairs of the project for the year and of its financial position as at 07 July 2021. The
management further accepts responsibility for the maintenance of accounting records which may be
relied upon in the preparation of the project financial statements, as well as adequate systems of
internal financial control.
The management certifies that, to the best of their knowledge, the information furnished to the auditors
for the audit was correct and is an accurate presentation of the project's financial transactions.
i) Designing, implementing and maintaining such internal control as they determine necessary to
enable the presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether
due to fraud or error;
ii) Selecting suitable accounting policies and applying them consistently; and
iif) Making accounting estimates and judgements that are reasonable in the circumstances.
Management acknowledge that the independent audit of the financial statements does not relieve them
of their responsibilities.
Nothing has come to the attention of management to indicate that the Project will not remain a going
concern for at least the next twelve months from the date of this statement
ov
Signed on behalf of the management by:
Yaze vhine
Financial Management Specialist
7
0 Temesgen frahun
Investment Operations Division
Deputy Commissioner
30 December 2021
HST General Partnership
Ethio-China Avenue; Wollo Sefer
Mina Building 5" Floor
HST P. O. Box 1608
Addis Ababa
Ethiopia
Chartered Certified Accountants and Authorized Auditors Tel. : +251 115 527666/67
PraonhiATar PUAN APEPTS PHAPLATE ARACT
ETHIOPIAN INVESTEMENT COMMISSION
FOR THE YEAR EDNED 07 JULY 2021
3d INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
Opinion
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of Economic Opportunities Program - Investment
Project Financing (IPF) financed by International Development Association (IDA) set out on pages 8 to 12,
which comprises the Statement of Financial Position as at 07 July 2021, Statement of Receipts and
Expenditure and the statement of Summary of Activity in the Designated Account for the year ended 07
July 2021 and the related notes to the financial statements, including summary of significant accounting
policies.
In our opinion, the accompanying financial statements give a true and fair view of the cash receipts and
expenditure of the project for the year ended 7 July 2021 and the funds at 7 July 2021 and were utilized
for the purpose defined in the funding agreement and in accordance with the accounting policies set out in
note 3.5 to the financial statement and the financial reporting provisions of the donors.
Basis for opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISAs). Our
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the Audit
of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are independent of the Project in accordance with
the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements, and we have fulfilled
our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. We believe that the audit
evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Report on other requirements
In all materials respects, we confirm that:
i External funds have been used in accordance with the conditions of the relevant financing
agreements, with due attention to economy and efficiency, and only for the purposes for which the
financing was provided;
ii) Goods and services financed have been procured in accordance with the relevant financing
agreements and the financiers procurement policies and procedures;
ii} All necessary supporting documents, records, and accounts have been kept in respect of all Project
ventures including expenditure reported using statements of expenditure (SOE) method of
disbursement;
iv) Designated Accounts have been maintained in accordance with the provisions of the relevant
financing agreements and disbursement letter and funds disbursed out of the Accounts were used
only for the purpose intended in the financing agreement;
v) The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the organization's accounting
policies and relevant World Bank guidelines;
vi) National laws and regulations have been complied with, and that the financial and accounting
procedures approved for the project; and
vii) There is verifiable ownership by Project or beneficiaries in line with the financing agreement in
respect of assets procured.
Management's responsibilities for the project financial statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements prepared
in accordance with the funding agreement between Ethiopian Investment Commission and International
Development Association and for such internal control as management determine is necessary to enable
the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or
error. The management of the Project is also responsible for overseeing the Project's financial reporting
process.
Audit * Tax - Consulting * Learning Solution
Partners: Tekeste Gebru; Solomon Gizaw; Getu Jemaneh; Yonas Harun; Solomon Melaku
3.1
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT (Continued)
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the project financial statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free from
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditors report that includes our
opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit
conducted in accordance with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in aggregate,
they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken based on these
financial statements.
As part of an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs, we exercise professional judgement and maintain
professional skepticism throughout the audit. We also:
Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit
evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not
detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error,
as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override
of internal control.
Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit to design audit procedures that
are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
Project's internal control.
Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
estimates and related disclosures made by the management.
Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the
disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events
in @ manner that achieves fair presentation,
We communicate with management regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of
the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we
may identify Tour audit.
A et Ne
a [EN
The enga geTme tie\gudit resulting in this independent auditors report is Solomon Gizaw.
i TA 
3.2 STATEMENT OF RECIEPT AND EXPENDITURE
RECIEPT
Fund receipts during the year
Other income
Fund balance at 8 July 2020
Total fund available
EXPENDITURE
Total expenditure during the year
Excess of receipt over expenditure
Fund balance at 7 July 2021
Notes
3.6
3.7
3.8
2021 2020
ETB ETB
36,455,585 .
4,796,382 2,799,847
41,251,967 2,799,847
12,245,914 20,431,695
53,497,880 23,231,542
20,336,274 10,985,629
33,161,607 12,245,914
G
SS
&
\ Spy, aS
W%, ified LH
d Audit
3.3
STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
AS AT 07 JULY 2021
Notes ETB ETB
ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and bank balances 3.9 34,084,099 12,471,416
34,084,099 12,471,416
FUND BALANCE AND LIABILITIES
Fund balance 33,161,607 12,245,914
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Payables and accruals 3.10 922,493 225,503
Total Liabilities and fund balance 34,084,099 12,471,416
The Financial Statements on page 8 to 12 were approved and Signed by the Economic Opportunities
Program - EIC Management on 30 December 2021
LamEsgen Tilafun Yaze Yihune C7
estment Operations Division Financial Management
Nao 0
\0 4; Certified Pd 4
ECOMOMIC OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM (EOP)
3.4
SUMMARY OF THE ACTIVITY IN THE DESIGNATED ACCOUNT
USD Bank Account (a/c#0102011300002): National Bank of Ethiopia
Opening Bank Balance
ADD: Receipts
Fund received from IDA
Fund brought from previous period
Funds available for use
Less: Transfers and Expenditures/payments
Expenditures/payments
Closing Balance
35
3.5.7
3.5.3
2021 2021 2020 2020
usp ETB usp ETB
926,953 36,455,585 " .
280,590 12,245,914 680,590 20,431,695
5 4,796,382 i! 2,799,847
1,207,543 53,497,880 680,590 23,231,542
700,000 20,336,274 400,000 10,985,629
507,543 33,161,607 280,590 12,245,914
ZN
EAN
A [ ~
Pd
 L
Wc 
To STtified Say)
10
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
3.5
3.5.1
3.5.2
35,3
3.54
3.5.5
3.56
BASIS OF PREPARATION
The financial statements have been prepared on modified cash basis of accounting whereby receipts are
recognized when cash is received and expenditures are recognized when incurred.
Budget
The budget is developed on the same accounting basis (modified cash basis), same classification basis, and
for the same period as for the financial statements. The budget was approved as required by the standard
conditions of the credit agreement and work-plan .
Funds Receipt
Fund receipt is recognized to the extent of credit extended by the Bank to the project's designated account.
Funds received and direct payments during the year are as follows:
Received Confirmed
(USD) (USD)
Cash transfer 926,953 926,953 ;
926,953 926,953
Expenditure
Expenditure represents amounts disbursed and costs incurred denominated in ETB.
Foreign currency transactions
Cash receipts and payments arising from transactions in a foreign currency are recoded in the financial
statements using the actual rate of exchange applicable on date of transactions. Foreign currency
denominated monetary assets and liabilities are translated to ETB using exchange rates applicable at year-
end.
Non-current assets
In accordance with lender's requirements, purchase of fixed assets is expensed on acquisition. EIC
maintains an asset register that tracks all project fixed assets.
Functional and presentation currency
Items included in the financial statements are measured using the currency of the primary economic
environment in which the entity operates (the functional currency). The financial statements are presented
in Ethiopian Birr ("ETB") which is the Project's functional currency.
Transactions and balances
Cash receipts and payments arising from transactions in a foreign currency are recorded in the financial
statements using the actual rate of exchange. Foreign currency transactions are translated into the
functional currency of the Project using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the
translation at year-end exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies
are recognized in statements of receipts and payments.
Na
K
\E9 2 A
NF, ertifred els 4
a
11
3.6 INCOME
Deposits
3.7 OTHER INCOME
Project Income
Miscellaneous
Gain on Foreign exchange fluctuation
3.8 OPERATING EXPENSES
Staff_PCU
Goods_PCU
Goods_ARRA
Services_PCU
Operations_PCU
3.9 CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENT
Cash at bank
Cash on hand
3.10 PAYBLES AND ACCRUALS
Salary payable
Employment Tax Payable
Pension Payable
VAT Payable
Account Payables
36,455,585 20,431,695
5,846 3,400
4,790,536 2,796,447
7,595,262 5,423,015
289,703 -
9,809,025 2,452,256
747,604 2,707,549
1,894,680 402,808
49,475 3,953
187,098 143,250
101,622 78,300
90 s
584,208 =
922,493 225,503
12
HH ST P. O. Box 1608
Chartered Certified Accountants and Authorized Auditors Ali old
ProohhiAT a PUAN APEPTS CHAPLAT@ ASACT E fold stah co
Ethiopian Investment Commission
Economic Opportunities Program
Investment Project Financing (IPF)
Attention: Ato Temesgen Tilahun
Dear Sir,
4 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON COMPLIANCE
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of EOP-IPF financed by IDA set out on pages 8 to 12,
which comprises the Statement of Financial Position as at 07 July 2021, Statement of Receipts and Expenditure
and the Statement of Summary of Activity in the Designated Account for the year ended 07 July 2021 and the
related notes to the financial statements, including summary of significant accounting policies.
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free
of material misstatement resulting from violations of agreement terms and laws and regulations that have a
direct and material effect on the financial statements.
Compliance with the terms of agreement, laws and regulations, contracts and binding policies and procedures
are the responsibility of the management of the Project. As part of our audit, we selected and tested
transactions and records to determine the project's compliance with agreement terms, laws, regulations,
contracts, binding policies and procedures. However, our objective was not to provide an opinion on overall
compliance with such provisions. Accordingly, we do not express such an opinion.
Material instances of non-compliance are failure to follow requirements or violations of the terms agreement
and laws and regulations that cause us to conclude that the aggregation of misstatements resulting from those
failures or violations is material to the financial statements.
Our consideration and evaluation of compliance requirements did not identify any instances of non-compliance
with grant agreements, laws and regulations.
pm
This report is intefit ) e-tnformation of EIC and IDA.
mead Tore nor
a  i Goo ia . .
The engagesAerit, yartrer om th dit resulting in this independent auditor's report is Solomon Gizaw.
gE ; 2%,
2  Hi
i 4 &
[a c
Be
ACs
Audit Partner g, Cory fica 4
HST General Partndftid # 2
Chartered Certified Accountants and Authorized Auditors
(Auditors of EOP-IPF)
Audit * Tax * Consulting * Learning Solution
Partners: Tekeste Gebru; Solomon Gizaw; Getu Jemaneh; Yonas Harun: Solomon Melaku
Mina Building 5* Floor
P. O. Box 1608
HST
Chartered Certified Accountants and Authorized Auditors ti Dh i
PtoohiAT a PUAN APLPTS CHLPeATO KAACT Emel: info@hat at com
wu
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing. In planning and performing
our audit, we considered the Project's internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing our
auditing procedures for expressing our opinion on the financial statements, but not for expressing an opinion
1 on the effectiveness of the entity's internal control. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the
effectiveness of the entity's internal control.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the preceding paragraph and was
not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be significant deficiencies or material
weaknesses and therefore, there can be no assurance that all deficiencies, significant deficiencies, or material
weaknesses have been identified.
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow management or
employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct
misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in
internal control, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the Project's
financial statements will not be prevented, or detected and corrected on a timely basis.
Based on our audit, we did not identify any deficiencies to report on.
This report is intepdedfo the information of EIC and IDA.
R the
Audit Parther %-
cS
HST Gene afferminy ny
Chartered Cert 1d/Accountahts and Authorized Auditors
(Auditors of EOP - IPF)