ETHIOPIAN INVESTMENT COMMISSION

ECOMOMIC OPPORTUNITIES PROGRAM (EOP)
INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING (IPF)
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR'S REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 07 JULY 2020
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES PROGRAM
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATION
IPF
EIC
ARRA
IDA
BOLSA
PCU
EPP
PES
DFID
ETB
Investment Project Financing
Ethiopian Investment Commission
Administration for Refugee and Returnee Affairs
International Development Association
Bureau of Labor and Social Affairs (regional)
Employment Promotion and Protection
Public Employment Service
U. K. Department for International Development
Ethiopian Birr
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART 1
PART 2
PART 3
PART 4
PART 5
Pages
INTRODUCTION
149 Background 3
19 Organizational objectives 3
1.3 Audit objectives 3
1.4 Audit scope 3
1.5 Audit methodology 4
1.6 Results of the audit 4
STATEMENT OF MANAGEMENT'S RESPONSIBILITIES 5
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
3.1 Independent auditors report 6-7
3:2 Statement of Receipt and Expenditure 8
3.3 Statement of Financial Position 9
3.4 Summary of Activity in the Designated Account 10
3.5 Notes to the financial statements 11-12
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON COMPLIANCE 13
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL 14
FOR THE YEAR ENED 07 JULY 2020
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
Background
Investment Project Financing (IPF) is a 5 year project with a credit extension of USD 25.89 Million by
International Development Association - IDA (World Bank) to the Federal Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia with an objective of at enhancing the capacities of Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC),
Administration for Refugee and Returnee Affairs (ARRA) and regional Bureau of Labor and Social Affairs
(BOLSA) for proper execution of the Program for Results where capacity-building and institutional
strengthening measures will be financed through the IPF.
The annual budget will be prepare in line with the below three components of the IPF
Component 1: Program implementation support to the EIC (US$8 million)
Component 2: Operations Management capacity support to ARRA (US$3 million)
Component 3: Employment Promotion and Protection (EPP) for refugees and support to Public
Employment Services (PESs) for Ethiopians (US$14 million)
Organizational Objectives
The project aims at enhancing the capacities of EIC, Administration for Refugee and Returnee Affairs
and Regional Bureau of Labor and Social Affairs (BOLSA) for proper execution of the Program for
Results where capacity-building and institutional strengthening measures will be financed through the
Investment Project Financing.
Audit objectives
The objective of the audit is to express an opinion on the Project financial statements of EOP-IPF for the
year ended 07 July 2020. The audit includes but not limited to the following tasks:
Give comments and observations on the accounting records, systems and controls that were examined
during the course of audit;
Identify specific deficiencies or areas of weakness in systems and controls, and make recommendations
for their improvement;
Report on the degree of compliance of each of the financial covenants in the financing agreement and
give comments, if any, on internal and external matters affecting such compliance
Determine whether the management and financial systems, including internal controls, within the
components are adequate for efficient and prudent management of funds;
Comment on the use of funds vis a vis approved budgets in relation to the agreement between the
organization and donors;
Assess the compliance with administrative/legal/fiscal issues regarding local employees contracted
under the organization; and
Recommend possible improvements and/or actions in any area on financial management and especially
areas where weaknesses were noted.
Audit scope
The audit scope required us to carry out sufficient audit steps and procedures to ensure that the audit
objectives were met for the year ended 07 July 2020. Details of the steps and procedures are described
in note 1.5.
1.5
1:53
1.5.2
1.5.5
1.5.6
1.5.7
1.6.1
Audit Methodology
We conducted the audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and in compliance with
the accounting policies and agreed terms between Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC) and IDA
(International Development Association - World Bank).
Internal controls
We have evaluated significant internal controls to obtain sufficient understanding of the design of
relevant controls, policies and procedures and whether they have been in operation during the period
under review.
Compliance with terms agreement and applicable laws and regulations
We have reviewed, assessed and reported on compliance with the terms and conditions of the
agreements,
Representations by grantees
We have obtained specific written representations from management.
Contractual obligations
Appraised relevant documents such as agreements with creditors;
Verified compliance of organization's expenditures with relevant terms of agreements as well as all the
applicable rules;
Verified compliance of the recipient with the terms and conditions of the agreement with the creditors;
and
Verified timely submission of interim and audited financial reports for the creditor as stipulated in the
agreement.
Receipts and disbursements
Verified compliance with the disbursements and procurement procedures set up for the organization.
Implementation
Examined whether the expenditures are classified in accordance with the budget.
Reviewed bank statements and other relevant books of accounts and assessed whether they show a
complete view of the income received and expenditure incurred;
Verified and confirmed that all commitments are genuine, with the relevant agreements disclosed within
the financial records and are for the pursuance of agreed Project objectives; and
Examined a representative sample of payments transactions including accuracy and completeness of
records.
Other income sources
Established whether other income generated by the project, such as sales of items, exchange gains,
etc. ; have been used in furtherance of the project's objectives.
Results of the audit
Summary of results by audit objectives
Reach an opinion as to the validity of the financial statements.
In our opinion, the financial statements give a true and fair view of the sources and uses of funds in
accordance with the funding agreement and accounting policies stated in note 3.5.
Report on the financial management and internal control findings
We reviewed the internal control structure and concluded that the system was adequate to meet the
needs of the program. We have not observed reportable deficiency or material weaknesses on the
internal control of the project.
2
STATEMENT OF MANAGEMENTS' RESPONSIBILITIES
The Management of Economic Opportunities Program - Investment Project Financing is responsible for
the preparation of the financial statements for each financial year which gives a true and fair view of
the Project as at the end of the year and of the operating results for that year. The management of the
project is required to keep proper accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy at any
time the financial position of the project. Management is also responsible for safeguarding the assets
of the project.
The management is responsible for the preparation of financial statements that gives a true and fair
view in accordance with the funding agreement between Ethiopian Investment Commission and
International Development Association and the accounting policies stated in Note 3.5 of this report and
for such internal controls as the management determines are necessary to enable the preparation of the
project financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
The management accepts responsibility for the financial statement which has been prepared using
appropriate accounting policies supported by reasonable and prudent judgments and estimates. The
management believes the project's financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the
financial affairs of the project for the year and of its financial position as at 07 July 2020. The
management further accepts responsibility for the maintenance of accounting records which may be
relied upon in the preparation of the project financial statements, as well as adequate systems of
internal financial control.
The management certifies that, to the best of their knowledge, the information furnished to the auditors
for the audit was correct and is an accurate presentation of the project's financial transactions.
i) Designing, implementing and maintaining such internal control as they determine necessary to
enable the presentation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether
due to fraud or error;
ii) Selecting suitable accounting policies and applying them consistently; and
iii) Making accounting estimates and judgements that are reasonable in the circumstances.
Management acknowledge that the independent audit of the financial statements does not relieve them
of their responsibilities.
Nothing has come to the attention of management to indicate that the Project will not remain a going
concern for at least the next twelve months from the date of this statement.
Signed on behalf of the management by:
AVI
= ii
Betseit Sisay Kedir Mussa
Program Director Financial Management Specialist
18 March 2021
HST General Partnership
Ethio-China Avenue; Wollo Sefer
Mina Building 5" Floor
HST P. O. Box 1608
Addis Ababa
Ethiopia
Chartered Certified Accountants and Authorized Auditors pa : Perea
Prav\NVATD PUAN APEPTG PHLPEAT@ ABACT ; fsdbhat ot tice
Let
ETHIOPIAN INVESTEMENT COMMISSION
FOR THE YEAR EDNED 07 JULY 2020
3:1 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
Opinion
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of Economic Opportunities Program -
Investment Project Financing (IPF) financed by International Development Association (IDA) set out on
pages 8 to 12, which comprises the Statement of Financial Position as at 07 July 2020, Statement of
Receipts and Expenditure and the statement of Summary of Activity in the Designated Account for the
year ended 07 July 2020 and the related notes to the financial statements, including summary of
significant accounting policies.
In our opinion, the accompanying financial statements give a true and fair view of the cash receipts and
expenditure of the project for the year ended 7 July 2020 and the funds at 7 July 2020 and were
utilized for the purpose defined in the funding agreement and in accordance with the accounting policies
n set out in note 3.5 to the financial statement and the financial reporting provisions of the donors,
Basis for opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISAs). Our
responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor's Responsibilities for the
Audit of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are independent of the Project in accordance
with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements, and we have
fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. We believe that the
audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Report on other requirements
In all materials respects, we confirm that:
i External funds have been used in accordance with the conditions of the relevant financing
agreements, with due attention to economy and efficiency, and only for the purposes for which the
financing was provided;
ii) Goods and services financed have been procured in accordance with the relevant financing
agreements and the financiers procurement policies and procedures;
ii) All necessary supporting documents, records, and accounts have been kept in respect of all Project
ventures including expenditure reported using statements of expenditure (SOE) method of
disbursement;
iv) Designated Accounts have been maintained in accordance with the provisions of the relevant
financing agreements and disbursement letter and funds disbursed out of the Accounts were used
only for the purpose intended in the financing agreement;
v) The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the organization's accounting
policies and relevant World Bank guidelines;
vi) National laws and regulations have been complied with, and that the financial and accounting
procedures approved for the project; and
vii) There is verifiable ownership by Project or beneficiaries in line with the financing agreement in
respect of assets procured.
Audit * Tax + Consulting * Learning Solution
Partners: Tekeste Gebru; Solomon Gizaw; Getu Jemaneh; Yonas Harun: Solomon Melaku
3.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT (Continued)
Management's responsibilities for the project financial statements
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the financial statements
prepared in accordance with the funding agreement between Ethiopian Investment Commission and
International Development Association and for such internal control as management determine is
necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement,
whether due to fraud or error. The management of the Project is also responsible for overseeing the
Projects financial reporting process.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the project financial statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free from
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditors report that includes our
opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit
conducted in accordance with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in aggregate,
they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken based on these
financial statements.
As part of an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs, we exercise professional judgement and
maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. We also:
 Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to
fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit
evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not
detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error,
as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override
of internal control.
+ Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit to design audit procedures that
are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the
Project's internal control.
+ Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting
estimates and related disclosures made by the management.
+ Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the
disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and
events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.
We communicate with management regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of
the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we
may identify during our audit.
The encagemsp RAPT E 2
ees 2
IN
[32
Audit Partners,
HST General Rat
3.2 STATEMENT OF RECIEPT AND EXPENDITURE
RECIEPT Notes
Fund receipts during the year 3.6
Other income 3.7
Fund balance at 8 July 2019
Total fund available
EXPENDITURE
Total expenditure during the year 3.8
Excess of receipt over expenditure
Fund balance at 7 July 2020
4
Au
2020 2019
ETB ETB
- 24,004,707
2,799,847 1,339,467
2,799,847 25,344,174
20,431,695 -
23,231,542 25,344,174
10,985,629 4,912,478
12,245,914 20,431,696
3:3
STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION
AS AT 07 JULY 2020
ASSETS
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and bank balances
FUND BALANCE AND LIABILITIES
Fund balance
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Payables
Total Liabilities
Notes
3.9
12,471,416 20,687,266
225,503 255,570
12,471,416 20,687,267
The financial statements on pages 8 to 12 were approved by the Economic Opportunities Program-
Investment Project Financing management on 24 February 2021 and signed on its behalf by:
Betseit Bisay 
Program Director
,
oa Pare kL
FSIIONN
(3
abd, id
WLS
~
S K
cof
, (5
NJ. q Certified Pa 4
i
Kedir Mussa
Financial Management Specialist
ECOMOMIC OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM (EOP)
3.4 SUMMARY OF THE ACTIVITY IN THE DESIGNATED ACCOUNT
USD Bank Account (a/c#0102011300002): National Bank of Ethiopia
Opening Bank Balance
ADD: Receipts
Fund received from IDA 3.5.1
Fund brought from previous period
Other income 3.5.7
Funds available for use
Less: Transfers and Expenditures/payments
Expenditures/payments 353
Closing Balance
fH 2%
= :
i E-
o 5
Cc) Fal
LC & KE
. S
A
[= Ly
3g, Cert ified 4
xUhorized BS
2020 2020
usD ETB
ferTM
680,590 20,431,695
& 2,799,847
680,590 23,231,542
400,000 10,985,629
280,590 12,245,914
10
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
3.5
3.5.1
3.5.2
353
3.54
3.5.5
3.5.6
BASIS OF PREPARATION
The financial statements have been prepared on modified cash basis of accounting whereby receipts are
recognized when cash is received and expenditures are recognized when incurred.
Budget
The budget is developed on the same accounting basis (modified cash basis), same classification basis, and
for the same period as for the financial statements. The budget was approved as required by the standard
conditions of the credit agreement and work-plan .
Funds Receipt
Fund receipt is recognized to the extent of credit extended by the Bank to the project's designated account.
Funds received and direct payments during the year are as follows:
Received Confirmed
(USD) (USD)
Cash transfer - -
Expenditure
Expenditure represents amounts disbursed and costs incurred denominated in ETB.
Foreign currency transactions
Cash receipts and payments arising from transactions in a foreign currency are recoded in the financial
statements using the actual rate of exchange applicable on date of transactions. Foreign currency
denominated monetary assets and liabilities are translated to ETB using exchange rates applicable at year-
end.
Non-current assets
In accordance with lender's requirements, purchase of fixed assets is expensed on acquisition. EIC maintains
an asset register that tracks all project fixed assets.
Functional and presentation currency
Items included in the financial statements are measured using the currency of the primary economic
environment in which the entity operates (the functional currency). The financial statements are presented
in Ethiopian Birr ("ETB") which is the Projects functional currency.
Transactions and balances
Cash receipts and payments arising from transactions in a foreign currency are recorded in the financial
statements using the actual rate of exchange. Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional
currency of the Project using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions. Foreign exchange
gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at year-end
exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognized in
statements of receipts and payments.
11
ECOMOMIC OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM (EQP)
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.10
INCOME
Deposits
OTHER INCOME
Miscellaneous
Gain on Foreign exchange fluctuation
OPERATING EXPENSES
Staff_PCU
Goods_PCU
Goods_ARRA
Services_PCU
Operations_PCU
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENT
Cash at bank
Cash on hand
TRADE AND OTHER PAYBLES
Salary payable
Employment Tax Payable
Pension Payable
VAT Payable
Withholding Tax Payable
pe 
N 1 Certified &
NY horized 2
0
tants 
3
&
20,431,695 24,004,707
3,400 2
2,796,447 1,339,467
5,423,015 3,548,115
3 1,128,219
2,452,256 -
2,707,549 5
402,808 236,144
12,471,416 20,686,824
: 442
3,953 3,953
143,250 115,000
78,300 126,000
= 9,369
& 1,249
12
HST PO. Box 1608
Chartered Certified Accountants and Authorized Auditors Tel. : +251 115 527666/67
PHooAheAT@ PHAN APEPTS CHLPLATD AS ACT
Economic Opportunities Program
Investment Project Financing (IPF)
Attention: Betseit Sisay
Dear Madam,
4 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON COMPLIANCE
We have audited the accompanying financial statements of EOP-IPF financed by IDA set out on pages 8 to 12,
which comprises the Statement of Financial Position as at 07 July 2020, Statement of Receipts and Expenditure
and the Statement of Summary of Activity in the Designated Account for the year ended 07 July 2020 and the
related notes to the financial statements, including summary of significant accounting policies.
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing. Those standards require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free
of material misstatement resulting from violations of agreement terms and laws and regulations that have a
direct and material effect on the financial statements,
Compliance with the terms of agreement, laws and regulations, contracts and binding policies and procedures
are the responsibility of the management of the Project. As part of our audit, we selected and tested
transactions and records to determine the project's compliance with agreement terms, laws, regulations,
contracts, binding policies and procedures. However, our objective was not to provide an opinion on overall
compliance with such provisions. Accordingly, we do not express such an opinion.
Material instances of non-compliance are failure to follow requirements or violations of the terms agreement
and laws and regulations that cause us to conclude that the aggregation of misstatements resulting from those
failures or violations is material to the financial statements.
Our consideration and evaluation of compliance requirements did not identify any instances of non-compliance
with grant agreements, laws and regulations.
This report is intended for the information of EIC and IDA.
Audit Part
HST General #2
Chartered Certi
(Auditors of EOP-IPF)
and Authorized Auditors
Audit + Tax + Consulting * Learning Solution
Partners: Tekeste Gebru; Solomon Gizaw; Getu Jemaneh; Yonas Harun; Solomon Melaku
ProvANCATO PHAN APEPTS PTAPRATO AS ACT PAM fe
st. et. com
5 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL
which includes the Statement of Financial Position as at 07 July 2020, Statement of Receipts and Expenditure
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing. In planning and performing
our audit, we considered the Project's internal control over financial reporting as a basis for designing our
auditing procedures for expressing our opinion on the financial statements, but not for expressing an opinion
on the effectiveness of the entity's internal control. Accordingly, we do not express an opinion on the
effectiveness of the entity's internal control.
Our consideration of internal control was for the limited purpose described in the preceding paragraph and was
not designed to identify all deficiencies in internal control that might be significant deficiencies or material
weaknesses and therefore, there can be no assurance that all deficiencies, significant deficiencies, or material
weaknesses have been identified.
A deficiency in internal control exists when the design or operation of a control does not allow management or
employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, to prevent, or detect and correct
misstatements on a timely basis. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in
internal control, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the Project's
financial statements will not be prevented, or detected and corrected on a timely basis.
Based on our audit, we did not identify any deficiencies to report on.
(Auditors of EOP
Audit * Tax * Consulting * Learning Solution