Leather & Leather Products 

INVEST IN ETHIOPIALeather & Leather ProductsQuality resources plus competitive cost—a recipe for success in the global leather value chain

Contact Us65,354,092Cows

50,243,044Goats

39,894,394Sheeps

Ethiopia represents an attractive investment opportunity for investors in the Leather and Leather Products sectorWe are the largest livestock producer in Africa and the 7th largest globally. Our livestock population has doubled since the dawn of the millennium to nearly 200 million. From establishing animal ranches to tanning hides and skins all the way to producing consumer products, we offer ample investment opportunities.

Our value proposition has attracted many investors in the production of footwear, leather gloves, bags, and garments and other leather products―generating over USD 120 million annually. Our leather industry has the capacity to produce over 500 million square feet of finished leather annually. Further, Ethiopian highland sheepskins are known for their superior quality globally and are preferred for high-quality leather garments.

To support investments in the leather sector and ensure environmentally sound processing practices, we have built specialized industrial parks with zero-liquid-discharge treatment facilities. Big brands like Huajian and George Shoe not only have made Ethiopia their manufacturing hub, but also have developed leather-focused industrial parks to increase their integration and grow their businesses.

With the government’s strong focus on boosting finished-leather production, an abundant and trainable labor force with competitive wages, attractive incentives, locational advantages, and favorable trade agreements, Ethiopia is the go-to place for investors looking to set up businesses in the leather industry. Whether it is tanning hides and skins or producing footwear, gloves, luggage, handbags, saddle/harness items, leather garments, or articles and accessories for finished leather, we have what you need to succeed.

Join us in this attractive investment sector where we are envisioning creating 300,000 jobs by 2030 and make Ethiopia a major global supplier of leather products.

Paving the way for investorsJoin us in this attractive investment sector where we are envisioning creating 300,000 jobs by 2030 and make Ethiopia a major global supplier of leather products.

Keep in touchOur sector specialists are here to provide specialized information and assistance and answer your questionsCONTACT PERSONMulusew Ashenf+25191522833

Mulusew.Ashenf@eic.gov.et

RELEVANT RESOURCESInvest in Ethiopia’s Leather & Leather Products SectorView All Resources