Tourism 

INVEST IN ETHIOPIATourismThe land of origins: partnerships in creating the experiences of a lifetime

Contact UsEthiopia represents an attractive investment opportunity for investors in the Tourism sectorEthiopia is home to nine UNESCO World Heritage sites, the most in Africa. It offers mesmerizing landscapes, diverse cultures, vast national parks, fascinating museums and beautiful lakes. From the largest mountains in Africa to the Danakil Depression (the third-lowest place in the world) to Erta Ale (a live volcano), we have diverse and breathtaking options for tourists. The unique Ethiopian Rift Valley (part of East African Rift Valley) is a remarkable region of volcanic lakes, with their famous collections of birdlife, great escarpments, and stunning vistas. We are the birthplace of mankind, coffee, and the Blue Nile, making us a fascinating destination for holidaymakers. Over 800,000 tourists arrive in Ethiopia every year to experience the best of the world, which provides a growing opportunity to establish tourism projects in the country.

Our capital is the capital of Africa. Addis Ababa is home to the head offices of the African Union, the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, and the embassies of more than 80 countries—adding to the growing number of diplomats and visitors. Brands catering to the growing tourism sector include Sheraton Addis, Radisson Blu, Hilton, Golden Tulip, and several other hospitality brands. Ethiopian Airlines connects tourists from all over the world, creating possibilities for adventurers to come and taste what Ethiopia presents.

Ethiopia offers investments opportunities in building tourism infrastructure (including hotels and resorts, convention centers, duty-free centers, cultural villages and centers) and the development of selected destinations. The Prime Minister has recently launched tourism development projects in Gorgora, Wonchi, and Koisha in which investors are welcome to take part.

Paving the way for investorsEthiopia offers investments opportunities in building tourism infrastructure including hotels and resorts, convention centers, duty-free centers, cultural villages and centers, and developing selected destinations. The Prime Minister has recently launched tourism development projects in Gorogora, Wonchi and Koisha, and investors are welcome to take part in one of the country’s biggest tourism projects.

